

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/1/10
Diverse UK companies are working with open data
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
Many different types of companies in the UK are harnessing the benefits of
open data.
Diverse UK companies are working with open data
Many different types of companies in the UK are harnessing the benefits
of open data
We identified and analysed 270 companies that use, produce or invest in open data
as part of their business, using desk research, surveys and interviews about their
experiences. The open data companies we studied have an annual turnover of
over £92bn, and over 500k employees between them. This shows the scale of
open data’s potential value in business.
This section explains our findings that UK open data companies vary by location,
age, industry and size; there is not one single model that defines a UK open data
company.
You can explore our findings on business strategies, the kinds of open data that
companies use or produce, the challenges they face in doing so and some real-life
company examples of open data innovation in sections to the right on this page.
What is open data?
Open data is data that anyone can access, use and share. For data to be
considered ‘open’, it must be published in an accessible format, with a licence that
permits anyone to access, use and share it.
What is an open data company?
We define an open data company as one that uses, produces, or otherwise invests
in open data as a key aspect of its work. It could be a data publisher, making data
open for others to use. It could be a user, creating services with open data made
available by other platforms. Or it could be an enabler, training or advising others in
how to work with open data.
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/2/10
Open data companies are distributed across the UK
UK companies do not need to be small, agile startups located in the tech
communities of East London to engage with open data. Our research revealed that
open data companies are located across Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and all
regions of England.
Figure 1.1: Map showing the location of 270 UK open data companies determined by main trading address, where
available (223 companies), otherwise by registered company address (47 companies).

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/3/10
Table 1.1: Location of 270 open data companies by country and region (based on ONS regions as defined in the
National Statistics Postcode Lookup). Locations determined by main trading address where available (223
companies), otherwise by registered company address (47 companies). Frequencies shown in brackets. UK
companies frequencies from ONS UK Business: Activity, Size And Location - 201.
While open data companies are located across all parts of the UK, the distribution
between regions is uneven. Some of this skew can be attributed to the distribution
of companies more generally, but not all. For example, around half (51%) of the
open data companies identified are located in London (compared to 17% of all
businesses based on ONS figures). We can look more closely at these companies
by mapping their distribution across the capital.

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/4/10
Figure 1.2: Map showing the location of 139 London-based open data companies determined by main trading
address, where available, otherwise by registered company address.
Open data companies are spread across London, covering 19 boroughs. For a full
breakdown of companies by borough, please see Appendix Table A1.1. The
highest concentrations of these companies in individual boroughs can be found in
Camden and Westminster (both 17%). More than one quarter (26%) are based in
the boroughs of Hackney and Islington combined. This can likely be attributed to
the East London technology cluster around Old Street roundabout, which is located
on the border of the two boroughs. This cluster represents 13% of all open data
companies in the UK. So while open data companies are evidently not exclusively a
‘Silicon Roundabout’ phenomenon, they have a disproportionately high presence in
this area.
UK companies old and new are investing in open data
Open data companies in the UK vary in age, as revealed through analysis of their
incorporation dates.

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/5/10
Table 1.2: Age of UK open data companies by incorporation date. Frequencies shown in brackets. UK companies
frequencies from ONS UK Business: Activity, Size And Location - 2013.
Open data is not the sole domain of startups and young companies – only about a
quarter (26%) of open data companies are less than 3 years old. The median age
for a UK open data company is eight years, with just over a third of companies
(34%) between four and nine years old. When this is considered alongside the 39%
of companies that are more than 10 years old, it becomes clear that open data can
be leveraged by well-established companies as well as recent startups. In fact, the
oldest identified open data company is over a century old.
UK companies across a range of industries are using open data
Open data companies in the UK are operating in a wide variety of 13 industries. We
can use UK Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes to determine which
broad industry groups they operate in.

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/6/10
Figure 1.5: Industry classification of "other industry" category in Figure 1.4

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/7/10
Table 1.3: Industry classification of UK open data companies and all companies by ONS broad industry group.
Frequencies shown in brackets. UK companies frequencies from ONS UK Business: Activity, Size And Location -
2013 (Table B1.1).
Companies we identified operate in 13 out of the 17 broad industry groups
recognised by the ONS. Over half (54%) of the open data companies operate in
the information and communication industry. This is notably larger than the 8%
of all UK companies in this industry, which was to be expected given the focus of
this research.
Professional, scientific and technical activities made up over a fifth (21%) of all
open data companies. A further 11% of open data companies are in the category
of business administration and support services. The remaining ten industries
each have a relatively small amount of representation. According to the SIC
industry classifications of broad industry groups, open data companies were not

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/8/10
represented in agriculture, forestry & fishing, accommodation & food services,
property or motor trades.
While the SIC industry classifications are able to provide a picture of the industries
in which open data companies operate, they do have some limitations. Given the
system was first designed in the 1940s and the codes were last updated in 2007, it
may fail to effectively capture emerging industries and technologies.
A second issue to be considered is that SIC codes may not accurately denote the
industry which open data companies work in. For example, companies that provide
open data products and services may be classified under information and
communication, even though they provide the majority of their products and
services to specific industries, such as ‘Agriculture, forestry & fishing’,
‘Accommodation and food services’ or ‘Property’. This explains the zero
frequencies shown in the table for these broad industry groups, despite the
presence of companies such as Syngenta, FoodTrade and Illustreets in this study.
UK companies large and small are using open data
Micro, small, medium and large enterprises are working with open data. Using our
survey data, we can closely examine the size of these companies, in terms of
number of employees.
Figure 1.6: Responses to the question "What is the size of your company?" (n=79)

27/10/2022, 14:12Diverse UK companies are working with open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business/9/10
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
Table 1.4: Responses to the question "What is the size of your company?". Frequencies shown in brackets (n=79).
UK companies frequencies from ONS UK Business: Activity, Size And Location - 2013 (Table B1.2).
UK open data companies vary in size, from those with fewer than 10 employees to
those with more than 1000. The majority (70%) of these companies can be defined
as micro-enterprise companies (with fewer than 10 employees). Small- and
medium-sized businesses (SMEs), with between 10 and 250 employees, make up
the majority of the remaining companies (23% of all companies).This is not to say
that larger companies are not also well-represented. In fact, 8% of responding
companies are large or enterprise sized, in having 251 or more employees.The
findings in this section tells us that open data can benefit diverse companies at
some level, regardless of their location, age, sector or size. The following sections
focus on business strategies, the kinds of open data that companies use or
produce, the challenges they face in doing so and some real-life company
examples of open data innovation.
How to cite
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
NEXT PAGE

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/1/7
How UK companies are using open data to innovate
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
Our research demonstrates that UK companies are using open data to create
new products and develop new business models, and that this is taking
place across diverse company types and sizes.
How UK companies are using open data to innovate
Our research demonstrates that UK companies are using open data to create
new products and develop new business models, and that this is taking place
across diverse company types and sizes.
Open data startups: forming new businesses based on open data
Open data startups are emerging micro enterprises formed to explicitly exploit the
benefits of open data. Often this comes in the form of a new product or service
which depends on open data to exist. Across a range of industries the open data
startup community are critical disruptors, challengers and innovators.
We identified a number of open data startups that are focused on impact other than
purely economic i.e. social and environmental. For example, FoodTrade does not
just consume open data to develop its allergen compliance tool; it also aspires to
redesign the food system in a more sustainable way:
“Transparency is a failure of the food system at the
moment. So there is a great opportunity for an open data
revolution to come in and disrupt the food system.
FoodTrade want to be the Wiki of the food system. We want
to make market intelligence open to people so that they
could then help themselves and start trading with each
other. Our goal, from the start, was to make the food
system sustainable and responsible.”
“
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/2/7
– Ed Dowding, FoodTrade
SMEs: diversifying product portfolios with open data
Our research has identified a number of cases of established SMEs using open
data to diversify their product and service offerings.
For example, GeoLytix offers data analytics services to large retailers. Open data
enabled the company to both create a distinctive brand in a market dominated by
large enterprises, but also develop a new line of unique data products that clients
can purchase for their internal analytics operations:
– Sarah Hitchcock, GeoLytix
Similarly, Shoothill, a company specialising in marketing campaigns for the creative
industries, started developing open data products when commissioned to integrate
data from the Environment Agency in web-based street maps. This initial project
led to a product line based on flood alerts, including GaugeMap which has been
recognised for its innovative and easy-to-use visualisations based on open data.
Entering the open data ecosystem enabled Shoothill to build expertise in handling
environmental data and develop new consulting services around it:
”
“We started to create open data products in order to
provide better quality data analytics to our customers.
Especially smaller companies that didn’t have the capacity
to build these datasets on their own. We realised that
being a data consultancy is a profitable line of work. As a
small for-profit company, open data products allow us to
build reputation in our sector and expand our customer
base, but also contribute back to the ecosystem and help
improve the quality of open data.”
“
”
“A lot of people have seen our flood maps now. Our brand
is a brand that they can trust. We have establish an area of
expertise. We’re good with environmental data, we know
what we’re doing, we’ve got a lot of experience in it.
People are engaging with us to build systems that use
either part or some of this data or mix it with other data
“

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/3/7
– Rod Plummer, Shoothill
Mime Consulting, a boutique consultancy in the educational sector, shows how
open data products can help companies to grow their customer base within their
sector and reach new customer segments:
– Steve Preston, Mime Consulting
Large companies: embracing open data
Arup are demonstrating how a big company can embrace open data. The company,
in the context of its digital.Arup services for the built environment, uses open data
for the development of products and services offered to their clients.
One such example is The Hazard Owl, Arup’s Risk Information Action System. By
using real-time natural hazard information from public feeds, the system alerts
clients of natural disasters to initiate risk mitigation and business continuity plans.
Arup not only embed open data in their technical infrastructure; they also use it as a
tool to improve engagement between citizens and city leadership.
sets, to come up with something useful. This has become
quite a big part of our business.”
”
“Open data helped us raise awareness of the importance
of data-driven decisions guiding post-GCSE educational
choices. It also enabled us to gain access to more schools
and local authorities that wish to explore the possibilities
offered by open data.”
“
”
“Arup is now moving to the next level: how to develop
technical architectures to make this data flow? How do you
set up in a city or at a city scale, architectures and
standards that allow the reduction of cost and friction but
also respect privacy and trust issues around data? And I
think the open data framework again is one of the key
methodologies to do that.”
“

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/4/7
– Volker Buscher, Arup
How UK companies work with open data
UK companies play a range of different roles when it comes to open data, and our
research reveals a number of these.
Figure 2.1: Responses to the question "How does your company currently use open data?" See Appendix Table
A2.1 for a table of responses including frequencies. (n = 79, multiple responses allowed
Nearly two thirds of companies surveyed (63%) are processing open data,
unsurprising given that open data quality is often a key concern for businesses.
Almost as many companies are developing products using open data (59%) and
providing insights based on open data (57%).
Fewer companies are providing open data infrastructure (42%). This may reflect
the dynamic that in most contexts there are fewer infrastructure providers than
users of their infrastructure. A sizeable number of companies responding to the
survey are publishing open data (41%), which is consistent with our findings
that government and the public sector is not the sole source of open data.
These open data roles do not appear to be exclusive pursuits. Indeed, we found
that over three quarters of respondents (79%) were carrying out two or more of
these functions.
Business approaches to open data products and services
”

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/5/7
When it comes to pricing for open data products and services, open data
companies are using a variety of different methods. In fact, over a quarter (28%) of
companies indicated they were using two or more mechanisms of the mechanisms
described below, either for the same or different open data offerings.
Figure 2.2: Responses to the question "Which pricing mechanism(s) does your company use for its open data
products and/or services?" See Appendix Table A2.2 for a table of responses including frequencies. (n = 72, multiple
responses allowed).
The majority of respondents (57%) are providing products and services which give
unlimited free access to everyone. The reasons for doing so vary for particular
companies and for particular products. One key driver identified by interviewees is
the role open data offerings can have in attracting customers to companies’ other
products and services.
– Ian MakGill, Spend Network
Over a tenth of companies (14%) provide free access to a subset of users. This can
be another means by which to attract and retain customers.
“It’s better to give some of it away and use it to convert
customers.”
“
”
“

27/10/2022, 14:12How UK companies are using open data to innovate – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg2/6/7
      
Creative Commons Licence
– Steve Preston, Mime Consulting
In addition, over a quarter of companies (28%) are providing rate or volume limited
access to their open data offerings, indicating the adoption of freemium pricing
models for open data products and services, as in many other areas of the digital
economy.
Almost a third of respondents (29%) provide only paid for products and services.
Companies offering paid for consultancy services may explain the prevalence of
this model. In addition a number of companies explicitly stated that their pricing was
dependent upon the client.
The findings in this section indicate that UK open data companies, collectively, are
adopting a wide variety of commercialisation approaches. Further research is
required to more thoroughly understand the specifics and benefits of various
business models when applied to open data products and services.
The other sections in this report focus on the range of companies investing in open
data, the kinds of open data that companies use or produce, the challenges they
face in doing so and some real-life company examples of open data innovation.
How to cite:
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE
“We intend to make the core features of Skills Route
accessible for free by schools and their students. We’ve
found that when you get your product into people that like
it, they’re your best salespeople. We know there is a
demand for this; it is about raising awareness, and
developing a good product that meets a clear need.”
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/1/5
Open data that drives business
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
UK companies are using government and non-government open data from a
wide range of sectors.
Open data that drives business
UK companies are using government and non-government open data
from a wide range of sectors
The UK is ranked top of 86 countries by the Open Data Barometer, which
measures a country’s readiness to secure benefits from open data, its publication
of key datasets and evidence of emerging impacts from open government data.
The UK’s central repository of public sector open data, data.gov.uk, contains nearly
15,000 datasets published with an Open Government License. Substantial open
data resources are also published by non-government sources, such as nonprofits
and community groups.
Uses of government open data
A large proportion (70%) of companies that responded to our survey use open data
provided by government.
Survey respondents were also asked to list the government datasets used in their
companies. In total, 25 different open data sources were named, spanning central
and local government and other public sector bodies, with numerous examples
given of specific datasets. Many companies listed multiple datasets, with some
stating that they used too many to list for the purposes of the survey. Appendix
Table A3.1 summarises the survey responses on this topic.
Ordnance Survey (OS) was cited most frequently (27% of companies) as an open
data source. OS is Britain’s national mapping agency and a member of the Public
Data Group. It has operated as a government-owned company since 1 April 2015.
Companies also use open data related to local regions. Local and regional
government (listed by 18% of companies) and the Department for Communities
and Local Government, a ministerial department concerned with community policy
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/2/5
(listed by 14% of the companies), are sources of open datasets that companies use
recurrently.
Other sources of open government data listed frequently include the Department
for Transport and related bodies, the Office for National Statistics (ONS)
and Companies House, which were listed by 20%, 18% and 14% of respondent
companies respectively.
Uses of non-government open data
Almost half (49%) of the surveyed companies use open data from non-government
sources such as businesses, nonprofits and community projects.
The companies we surveyed were asked to list the datasets they use from non-
government sources. Appendix Table A3.2 summarises the responses. Together,
they named 14 different sources, and listed a variety of different datasets within
them.
Use of open geographic data is particularly popular amongst those companies
that listed specific open data sources in their responses. OpenStreetMap, an
openly licensed map of the world created by volunteers – with extensive
annotations available as open data – is used by 24% of these companies.
Companies also use open data from various non-governmental, international
projects, generally developed by communities of members seeking to make large
quantities of data available for widespread use. Projects such
as DBpedia, geonames, Wikimapia, p-lei.org,
DMOZ, OpenCorporates and OpenCharities are all cited as sources of open data
used by the companies.
Transport-related data sources are also popular. These include Traveline,
the Association of Train Operating Companies (ATOC), the General Transit Feed
Specification (GTFS), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
and the National Air Traffic Services (NATS).
We can identify how companies use a combination of government and non-
government open data by looking at those that responded to both of the above
questions. Appendix Table A3.3 summarises these combined responses.
The most number of respondent companies (39%) use open data from both
government and non-government sources, although only a tenth (10%) are using
non-government open data exclusively. This may indicate the importance of the
role of government in the open data ecosystem, as a publisher of data to support
development of new products and services, and as the driver of policy interventions
related to open data and innovation.
It is important to note that around a fifth of respondents (21%) stated that they were
not using data from either type of source, which could represent those companies

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/3/5
that solely provide infrastructure and/or publish open data and do not make use of it
themselves.
What types of data do companies use most
When describing the open data they use, companies were able to select multiple
sectors. Their responses show that data from a wide range is being used.
Figure 3.1 - Responses to the question "What types of open data does your company use?" (n=76, multiple
responses allowed). See Appendix Table A3.4 for a table of responses including frequencies.
Geospatial/mapping open data is used by more than half (57%) of all respondent
companies. Several other types of open data are used by more than a third of
respondents, namely transportation (43%), environment (42%), demographics
& social (40%) and business (38%) data.Respondent companies often use open
data from multiple sectors. In fact, 79% of companies use data related to more
than one sector and 14% of them use data related to more than 10. The mean and
median number of data types by sector used by companies is 4.75 and 4
respectively. These usage statistics, combined with detailed statements made by
the companies interviewed, suggests that commercial value can be drawn from
combining open datasets.
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/4/5
Companies could select ‘other’ for data they felt was not covered by the prescribed
list of sectors, and to name those they used. They listed sectors like ‘3D’, ‘crime’,
‘Internet of Things’, ‘jobs data’ and ‘political’. These responses not only further
reflect the wide breadth of open data use by sector, but also open data use in
combination with other emerging technologies. For example, the development of
“How do we make money? Well, people are engaging with
us to build systems that use [...] this [Environment Agency]
data or mix it with other datasets, to come up with
something useful. So it’s become quite a big part of our
business.”
“
– Rod Plummer, Shoothill
”
“The data was siloed. You couldn’t search across multiple
company registers, you couldn’t search for directors
across multiple jurisdictions and you couldn’t combine the
information from those registers together. We felt that the
need was essentially to create a single unified interface to
all of this data, allowing it to come together. Insight
generally comes from combining more than one dataset
together. As each dataset becomes available as open
data, the opportunities for taking that and coming up with
completely new business models, and new ideas about
what’s possible, are tremendous.” 
– Chris Taggart, OpenCorporates
“
”
“Individual datasets? Yes they are accessible, but
individual datasets by themselves don’t really add that
much value. It’s only when you combine it, you clash things
together, that you start seeing some value coming out of
it.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/5/5
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
widespread 3D printing capabilities and the growth of Internet of Things networks
will raise new questions about the potential of open data. Companies in the UK are
beginning to address these questions.
The other sections in this report focus on the range of companies investing in open
data, business strategies, the challenges they face and some real-life company
examples of open data innovation.
How to cite
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE
“You could have a situation where we are building a silo of
data around, say, Camden or something, but actually there
are so many use cases that need to be fulfilled. If you don’t
have an easy data exchange, the industry is not going to
grow. The reason why the web has taken off is because we
got rid of the silos. I think for Internet of Things the same
thing needs to happen in order to [have the same]
explosion.” 
– Yodit Stanton, OpenSensors.io
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/1/13
Challenges for open data companies
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
Data quality and licensing terms are critical factors for companies using
open data.
Challenges for open data companies
Data quality and licensing terms are critical factors for companies
using open data
In our survey, we asked companies to rate how far eight issues, or characteristics,
influence their use of open data. These issues were derived from an assessment of
open data publishing best practices, based on the Open Data Certificates – a set of
standards designed to help make open data easier to find, share and use.
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/2/13
Figure 4.1 - Responses to the question "Please indicate the extent to which each of the following issues influence
your company's decision to use open data." (n=74) (Note that the percentages for ‘Accuracy of data’ sum to 101%
due to rounding.) See Appendix Table A4.1 for frequencies.
The eight issues appear to have varying levels of influence on a company’s
decision to use open data. We provided a free-form response field so companies
could elaborate on these and share further insights. The responses were mapped
against the eight prescribed issues and are quoted throughout the discussion
below.
Accuracy
Many companies that responded (80%) found accuracy of data important, with 39%
of companies saying it had great influence on their decision to use open data.
Example responses (related to accuracy of the data) to the question “If you wish to
elaborate on any of these issues, please do so”:
The data accuracy issues shared by companies through their survey responses
and in-depth interviews fall into two categories: i) inaccuracies and quality issues
with the data itself, and ii) significantly varying quality and presentation of
similar data between different publishers, such as government spending data by
department.
Some of the main issues companies raised around data accuracy were that data
can be collected or presented inconsistently, and often it is not granular
enough. Regarding crime data, for example:
“Pricing is not an issue as long as the data is of great
quality (accuracy) and desirable.”
“
”
“There is little or no benefit to the user if they do not trust
that the data is accurate and up-to-date.”
“
”
“The second [issue] is changes in the data – [the police]
keepontinkeringwithwhattheyshouldincludeinitA
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/3/13
Other accuracy issues highlighted by companies surround the various different
standards for data collection and publication, which cause problems when
combining data from multiple sources:
Licensing
An open licence is one that enables anyone to access, use and share data,
including companies who can use it to develop commercial products and services.
Over half (55%) of the companies said that the way that datasets are licensed had
a great influence on their decision to use data. Only 8% suggested that licensing
had little or no influence.
Example response (related to licensing of the data) to the question “If you wish to
elaborate on any of these issues, please do so”:
keep on tinkering with what they should include in it. A
case in point being our local authorities have a 101
incident, which is [classed as being] anti-social behaviour.
So if you see a burnt-out car, or someone’s done graffiti, or
someone’s dumped a mattress in the street, it’s antisocial
behaviour but it’s not a criminal offence.
The local authorities catch incidents and they give that
information to the police. The police could very easily
break that down, and that could be easily mapped and
presented back to you as a citizen. But they just group it all
under ‘anti-social behaviour’ and refuse to release that
information.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
”
“We take data from over 330 different publishers [...] not
one of them does the same thing as the next one and most
of them don’t do the same thing month to month. I’ve got
170 councils in our dataset [...] Some publish virtually
nothing, some publish a lot. The variance in quality of the
data is incredibly difficult. Data quality is a big issue. 
– Ian Makgill, Spend Network
“
”
“Licensing terms of the dataset should include commercial
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/4/13
The UK Open Government Licence is the required licence for use by all central
government departments and agencies publishing open data and its use is
encouraged for local authorities and other areas of government.
The Creative Commons public domain licence (CC0) and attribution licence (CC-
BY) are commonly used open licences for non-government data, and, similarly to
the UK Open Government License, allow for commercial reuse of the data. The
Creative Commons attribution and share-alike licence (CC-BY-SA) is also used, but
may limit a company’s ability to use that data for commercial products and services
by requiring them to also attach the same open licence to the data they derive.
Timeliness, provenance and accessibility
Companies indicated that data timeliness, provenance and access also influence
their decision to use open data, with 31%, 42% and 35% of them citing it as having
great influence, respectively.
Example responses (related to the timeliness, provenance and ease of access to
the data) to the question “If you wish to elaborate on any of these issues, please do
so”:
Timeliness of data
Provenance of data
use.”
”
“There is little or no benefit to the user if they do not trust
that the data is accurate and up-to-date.”
“
”
“Ideally [data] has scheduled updates (e.g.
OpenStreetMap every 60 seconds)”
“
”
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/5/13
Ease of access to datasets
Timeliness of data is discussed more by some of the companies interviewed in-
depth. In particular, companies would like data to be published with as little delay
as possible, often driven by the need to combine datasets, which are more timely:
“Provenance is vital unless you can independently verify.”
”
“It is notable that public data stores are ordinarily
presented as ‘separate’ from corporate web pages, such
that open data of relevance to specific policy objectives
and/or services do not appear in the same place to
promote awareness of them and/or facilitate ease of
access for non-technical users.”
“
”
“The current ‘improvements’ being implemented at
government level has hindered much of our work due to
data moving [and] data links often not working.”
“
”
“We use [claimant data from the Office of National
Statistics] and we compare that with the number of [job]
vacancies that we observe on Adzuna. I would say that
one frustration, which you may have heard from other
sources as well, is the timeliness of that data. In particular,
the ONS data is effectively a month or two (or possibly
even longer) out of date before it gets made available. 
I appreciate some of the reasons why there is a delay, but
it does feel like there is scope for reducing some of that
delay. That’s one of the biggest limitations that we see
because obviously our data, due to the nature of our
business, is very much real-time. At any minute of the day
tlhjbdt’td
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/6/13
Data provenance relates to its source and the way it has been collected, used and
modified. Clear data provenance helps users to understand the context around the
open data, and allows them to use it with confidence. For example:
Open data being difficult to access was another issue raised by the companies.
This is generally down to many different sources of open data, including websites,
data stores and portals:
we can see exactly how many job adverts we’ve got and
what the average salaries are, whereas there’s this quite
big lag between data being collected by the ONS and the
publication of that data.” 
– James Neave, Adzuna
”
“I very much run as a stream, I have to constantly flow with
data. I want to constantly be as fresh as possible. Albeit
some datasets may only be released once a year, but it’s
enough for some people so you can do direct comparison
year on year. But if you’re just dropping in random bits of
data, it’s not a lot of use to people, it’s got to be a constant
flow so you can map trends and compare the previous
activity and so on.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
“
”
“We provide clear, unambiguous data with provenance, so
we say where we got it from and when we got it. That sort
of thing is quite hard to get in the business information
world and we do it in an effective, efficient way that is more
effective and more efficient than the companies getting it
themselves. 
People are wanting to combine data together and that lack
of provenance really makes the data much less useful. 
– Chris Taggart, OpenCorporates
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/7/13
Data formats, accompanying documentation and support from publishers all
have less of an impact on whether or not companies use open data.
Responses regarding the data formats did, however, reveal a variety of opinions on
this topic. These particularly relate to the provision of open data in computer-
accessible and machine-readable formats, via an Application Program Interface
(API), for example, or in linked data form.
Example responses (related to the format of the data) to the question “If you wish to
elaborate on any of these issues, please do so”:
“There’s no central data point [...] I know you have the
Cabinet Office website, data.gov.uk, but you have to
monitor that [...] There’s lots of local websites and there’s
the Land Registry as well. There’s also Police.co.uk, there’s
many other areas where data is being sent out. Again
that’s all released in different ways in different formats. A
lot of companies don’t even know about the demographic
data, or the social economic data, that’s available. So it’s
as much about market intelligence as it is about making
that data accessible.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
“
”
“That’s another problem, if there’s too much [data], you
can’t find it. There [are] different places to find different
bits, you’ve got data.gov, you’ve got all these different
websites, all these different agencies. They’ve all grown
organically and separate from each other and I know
everybody would love one enormous data place where
you go to get all your data. The trouble is if that site isn’t
really good, you’re never going to find it.” 
– Rod Plummer, Shoothill
“
”
“Data need to be in a computer readable format. The
format type does not matter.”
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/8/13
The companies didn’t choose to elaborate on the issues of accompanying
documentation or help and support from publishers, which also have relatively low
influence on the decision to use open data.
This may be an artefact of the employees who responded to the survey on the
behalf of their companies, many being technology specialists and/or working
closely with open data. Those with expertise may not need help and support from
publishers or accompanying documentation.
Other challenges
A further challenge surrounding the use of open data – which wasn’t addressed
explicitly in the eight issues discussed – was revealed when the companies were
askedtodescribewhethertheyhadpreviouslyusedopendatabutstopped
”
“Access to data via an API (of whatever sort) is usually a
big advantage for us.”
“
”
“There are a number of reference datasets that we wish the
UK public sector would provide in linked data form. If they
did, we’d use them a lot.”
“
”
“Has to be processable using opensource tools”
“
”
“Has to be complete datasets i.e. not stuck behind a
sparql endpoint”
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/9/13
asked to describe whether they had previously used open data but stopped.
This challenge concerns the continuity of open data publishing. Some
companies said the open data that they had previously used to develop a product
or service had not been updated or had become unavailable.
Example responses (related to the continuity of data publishing) to the question “If
your company has previously used open data in particular products and/or services
but ceased to do so, could you please describe why?”
The responses describe issues surrounding discontinuous publishing,
particularly by government. Companies describe how data they used was produced
as a one-off and not maintained as an ongoing release. The usefulness of Freedom
of Information (FOI) requests, and the data they may release, to companies in the
UK is also questioned:
“Still use old version but, for example, VisitEngland no
longer appear to maintain their list of tourist attractions.”
“
”
“– because, the map was produced as a ‘one off’ and
wasn’t updated.”
“
”
“There is a long way to go before we get real open data
from government – many requests are treated as FOIs not
data provision. All work with Gov data is fragile as you
cannot guarantee that the following year a different data
officer won’t take a different view as to what will be realised
and why.”
“
”
“The biggest issue [with open data] is someone could just
stop providing a dataset. That’s the biggest problem. So if
someone comes awry or it just gets taken away, I can’t end
upforcingthemtoreleasedatasetsthat’sthebiggest
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/10/13
The need for more open data to be published by government is a common issue
raised by companies interviewed. Companies discuss in detail what kinds of open
data could be used commercially, with two distinct themes emerging from the
interviews.
The companies suggest that there is still more work to be done on the part of
government to release open data. The partial release of spend statements and
other transaction data by publicly-funded entities, such as the NHS, is a challenge
for companies developing products and services. This partial release, and
subsequent demand for more open data to be published, can result from
inconsistencies in publishing across government entities, or incompleteness of the
data they do publish. For example:
up forcing them to release datasets, that’s the biggest
problem. 
If I was to [make] a Freedom of Information request, that
would be a one-off and within a few weeks would pretty
much become useless to people.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
”
“I don’t mind inconsistency in the publishing [of the open
data]. What  is really problematic  is not publishing at all. For
example, nearly half of the NHS doesn’t have to publish
spend statements  because they’re supposed to be
independent of central control  .  Localism shouldn’t be used
as an excuse to create a democratic deficit ,     a nd when I
say not publishing, that could  be about sub-quality data as
well as no data. There’s a difference between dirty data,
where we can extract it if we work on it, and data that
doesn’t have information. So give me a  six months of
transactions without any dates, that’s no use.  We can’t
work with that.  S o that’s the first challenge,  getting useable
data.” 
– Ian Makgill, Spend Network
“
”
“The future of open data is in the hands of governments
because what we’re talking about, for the most part, is
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/11/13
Companies also describe how the release of more open government data could
realise commercial opportunities by enabling them to develop better or new
products and services:
core public data that was always meant to be part of the
public record but that over the last 10 or 20 years has
turned into something that they sell. I think that the UK has
led the world in this and is now starting to genuinely reap
benefits from this, in terms of both innovation and in
internal processes. Governments, particularly those
governments that sign the Open Data Charter, need to
follow that through otherwise all the things they talked
about to do with transparency, better governance,
innovation and so on, will not come to fruition. I think if we
want those things, if we want good governance, if we want
transparency, if we want a healthy democracy and if we
want innovation, then open data is an absolute requirement
because all of those statutory core datasets are essential
to this.” 
– Chris Taggart, OpenCorporates
”
“Open data needs to go more local. I think [government]
needs to start getting some pressure applied on [local
councils]. Where are the public toilets? Some release [that
data] some don’t. 
[Data about] how tall [the trees are], about the local parks,
about dogs being caught, anti-social behaviour incidents,
social housing, planning applications, a request for a new
planning application [and] why it’s been rejected – all this
should be freely available online in a standard format, so
you, as a citizen, can just tap in instantly and see what’s
happening. If data was more freely available we would be
even more adult about how we engage with government.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
“
”
“The open data portion of Companies House information is
itdbtitilittlbitliitdditldbfl
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Challenges for open data companies – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg4/12/13
You can find a summary of open data issues that could be addressed by
government to continue to drive innovation in our conclusion and
recommendations.
How to cite
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE
quite good but it is a little bit limited and it would be useful
if they could make more of it publicly available. 
It would be valuable for us because we’d be able to
provide more information about employers for our users so
that, say you click on a particular job advert on Adzuna,
you could for example see that [...] the employing
company is Tesco. Then, if we were able to get the
information from Companies House open data, we could
have a more detailed page of information about Tesco
talking about, for example, the total size of the business,
number of staff, turnover, revenue and profit over the last
few years. I believe that only some of that interesting
information is currently available through Companies
House open data.” 
– James Neave, Adzuna
”
“Transparency is good but I think a more interesting aspect
[of public sector data release] is when you can use that
data to make better decisions [...] to either improve the
way that somewhere is governed or to make better use of
limited money” 
– Bill Roberts, Swirrl
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/1/9
Examples of UK companies using open data
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
How are UK companies working with open data?
Examples of UK companies using open data
Arup 
Adzuna 
Doorda
FoodTrade 
GeoLytix 
Mime Consulting 
OpenCorporates 
OpenSensors.io 
Shoothill 
Spend Network 
Swirrl 
TransportAPI 
How to cite
How are UK companies working with open data?
In this section we highlight 12 companies that use or produce open data as part of
their work in different ways. From smart city planning to flood warnings, job
opportunities to education options, the companies use open data to offer
diverse services to businesses, government and individuals.
Arup
Arup uses open data to help plan smart cities and mitigate against risk and natural
disasters in the built environment.
Arup is a multinational professional services firm of designers, planners, engineers,
consultants and technical specialists. It provides engineering, design, planning,
project management and consulting services for the built environment.
Open data is an important part of Arup’s work with smart cities and the technology
thatsupportsthemAruphasdevelopedpolicyframeworksthatfocusontheroleof
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/2/9
that supports them. Arup has developed policy frameworks that focus on the role of
open data to deliver new, better or more efficient services in cities, while
responding to decreasing public sector budgets. Arup incorporates open data as
part of the technical architecture required to overcome constraints in cities such as
traffic and congestion, and improve engagement between citizens and city
leadership. The company has developed a risk information action system, The
Hazard Owl, which uses real-time natural hazard information from public data
feeds. It is used to alert clients of natural disasters so they can mitigate against risk
and help to protect their business.
Arup also sees open data as an increasingly meaningful source of information for
the analytics and advisory services it provides.
Website: arup.com 
Twitter: @ArupGroup 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Large 
Number of employees: 11,355 
Annual turnover: £1,048,276,000
Adzuna
Adzuna simplifies the job hunting process by helping users better understand the
market and find the best jobs for them.
Adzuna is a search engine that aggregates job adverts to provide a comprehensive
view of the jobs market. It combines adverts from several hundred different online
sources, including the largest online job boards and vacancies advertised directly
by employers. This gives job hunters access to over 1 million job adverts at a
given time.
Adzuna uses open data to develop its Job Index, which provides an accurate,
complete and timely view of the UK jobs market. The Job Index compares Labour
Market Statistics (Jobseeker’s Allowance Claimant Count), published by the Office
for National Statistics, with Adzuna’s jobs data to generate new metrics such as
jobseekers per vacancy by location. These are reported in its monthly Job Market
Report, which can be used by job hunters to compare the availability of jobs in
different areas of the country.
The company also provides free access to its jobs data via an application program
interface (API). The aim is to allow third-parties to reuse the data aggregated by
Adzuna to power job-search services in their websites and develop new
applications.
Website: adzuna.co.uk 
Twitter: @Adzuna 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Companysize:Small

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/3/9
Company size: Small 
Number of employees: 10-50
Doorda
Doorda uses open data to help citizens and businesses discover and understand
what is happening on their streets and in their local communities.
Doorda is a startup company that specialises in bringing together different open
government datasets into a single online map. This enables citizens to access,
understand and engage with public information on their local area.
Doorda aggregates open data from a number of different sources, including Ofsted,
the Land Registry, the Food Standards Agency, the NHS and the Home Office.
Citizens can use it for a number of different purposes. These include searching for
properties, locating schools, understanding road safety, identifying crime and
anti-social behaviour hotspots, comparing restaurant hygiene and accessing
local news.
The company also specialises in making open data accessible and useful to
businesses and government in unique, innovative ways. Through access to the
Doorda API, users can work with vast quantities of open data to develop new
commercial understanding of an area. Doorda also provides advisory services for
businesses, enabling them to investigate the availability of wider open data relevant
to their interests and create bespoke data solutions to provide local, national and
international insights.
Website: doorda.com 
Twitter: @Doorda 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
FoodTrade
FoodTrade maps the food supply chain system to help people buy and sell fresh
produce, contributing to the creation of a fair, sustainable and local food system.
FoodTrade is an online food platform that brings together local food producers
and consumers. Producers, such as small farmers, restaurants or individuals, can
feature their produce and map their supply chains to find new consumers and
collaborators. Consumers can also use its search tools to find producers and
sellers of various different types of food.
FoodTrade has enrolled more than 1,600 businesses into its platform to date, and
has facilitated more than 1,300 connections between them and other users. As a
result, FoodTrade can map supply chains and promote transparency within the
food sector, in which most supply chain data remains closed.

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/4/9
FoodTrade recently launched FoodTrade.Menu, an automatic allergen labeller that
uses open data from the Food Standards Agency. It can be used by restaurants
and caterers to ensure their menus comply with allergen regulations. The menu
data can then be fed into the FoodTrade platform to create ingredient lists and
link users with local suppliers based upon the ingredients they need. FoodTrade
will then make this extensive menu, produce and marketplace data available to the
public through open APIs.
Website: foodtrade.com 
Twitter: @foodtradeHQ 
Headquartered: Bristol, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
GeoLytix
GeoLytix combines geospatial data with domain expertise to help people make
better decisions about the location of their businesses.
GeoLytix is a specialist geospatial data and consultancy company. It offers a wide
range of products based on geospatial data, such as maps, boundary data and
points of interest, as well as analysis, training and consultancy services to
develop new commercial insight.
A number of the company’s geodata products are based on open data from
sources such as Transport for London (TfL), the Land Registry, the Department for
Education, the Department for Health and OpenStreetMap. GeoLytix develops
them by processing and adding new value to existing open datasets or by
creating new, novel ones using open data. These data products can be purchased
off-the-shelf with transparent licensing terms.
GeoLytix also releases a selection of its geodata products as open data. These
include processed census data, a snapshot of postal sector boundaries, a subset of
retail places, workplace data and manually geocoded supermarket locations.
GeoLytix also develops complex, bespoke models to help business solve their
location challenges.
Website: geolytix.co.uk 
Twitter: @Geolytix 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
Mime Consulting
Mime Consulting uses open data to enable students and their families to make
informed decisions about their educational choices and career paths.
MimeConsultingisadataconsultancycompanyItoffersarangeofmanagement

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/5/9
Mime Consulting is a data consultancy company. It offers a range of management
information services including data warehousing, analysis, visualisations and
dashboard design. It also offers user-friendly software and website design to help
automate data collection, analysis and reporting.
The company has developed Skills Route, a platform designed to help young
people make informed choices regarding their education. Skills Route
combines students’ chosen subjects, grades and location with open data to provide
personalised university, further education and employment options available in
the future. It also shows how these choices can influence their career paths and
future remuneration for their work.
Skills Route’s projections are based on open data published by the Department for
Education. Specifically, it uses the Level 3 value-added dataset (L3VA), which
captures the progression of students between Key Stage 4 education and the end
of their Level 3 qualification (which includes A-Levels and vocational equivalents). It
also uses other open data from the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) and
the UK Commission on Employment and Skills (UKCES) to ensure that it shows
students the full range of further and higher education opportunities.
Website: mimeconsulting.co.uk 
Twitter: @SkillsRoute 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
OpenCorporates
OpenCorporates makes information about companies and the corporate world
more accessible, discoverable and usable for citizens and businesses.
OpenCorporates is the world’s largest open database of company information.
It has collected data for over 84 million companies from over 100 jurisdictions and
aims to record a URL for every corporate entity in the world. Users can search
the database for a particular company or browse companies by jurisdiction, to
identify characteristics such as company type, trading status, incorporation date,
registered address and company directors.
OpenCorporates aggregates data from a number of different sources, often through
automated scraping of web pages and PDFs. Sources include national company
registers, government websites, national information centres, official company
filings, gazettes and data released under the Freedom of Information Act.
Access to OpenCorporates’ data is enabled via an API, and reuse of the data is
governed by an Open Database Licence with share-alike and attribution clauses.
This requires users to publish their work back to to the open data community as
open data. Those who wish to use the data without the share-alike restrictions, or
API rate and volume limits, can do so under commercial licensing agreements.
Usersincludejournalists,governments,majorcreditreferenceagenciesand

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/6/9
Users include journalists, governments, major credit reference agencies and
anti-money laundering organisations, which use the data to better understand,
monitor and regulate companies around the world.
Website: opencorporates.com 
Twitter: @opencorporates 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company Size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
OpenSensors.io
OpenSensors.io provides an Internet of Things (IoT) platform that helps users
create smart products and services to build better connected systems and
environments.
OpenSensors.io offers smart products and services such as real-time data
access, data security and storage, analytics and machine learning via its IoT
platform.
OpenSensors.io’s real-time messaging engine can process millions of messages a
second from any internet-connected device, such as a sensor or camera.
Businesses can use the platform for many purposes – from automating huge
networks of car parks through licence plate recognition cameras and motion
sensors to optimising office spaces by configuring devices such as thermostats,
lights and locks to respond to the preferences of the people working in them.
Anyone using the Opensensors.io platform to publish data can use it for free,
providing their device publishes their work as open data. As a result, the platform
provides access to valuable real-time and historical open data generated in
thousands of projects and their connected devices. This enables other individuals
and businesses to use the data to experiment, innovate, research and incorporate it
into their own products and services.
Website: opensensors.io 
Twitter: @OpenSensorsIO 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
Shoothill
Shoothill creates visuals and tools to convert geospatial and statistical data into
dynamic, accessible information on flood risks.
Shoothill is a software development company that specialises in data visualisation
and online mapping. It currently offers three mapping products that can be used to
understand and reduce the risk of flooding in the UK, based on open data provided
by the Environment Agency.

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/7/9
ygy
Shoothill’s FloodAlerts product is an online graphical representation of flood
warnings, which provides localised updates to keep users informed about
flooding in their area. Shoothill’s GaugeMap is a live map of river levels, based on
data from 2,400 river level monitoring gauges and is updated every 15 minutes.
Each gauge is assigned a Twitter account for local citizens to follow, which tweets
snapshots of this data twice every day. Users can also visualise flood risks and
calculate the risk of flooding to their property by river or sea, using Shoothill’s
Check My Flood Risk.
Shoothill also provides access to selected Environment Agency data through APIs,
which enable others to develop new products and tools using the data. This
includes the Flood Data, River & Tidal Levels, Groundwater, River Flow and 3-Day
Flood Forecast datasets.
Website: shoothill.com 
Twitter: @Shoothill 
Headquartered: Shrewsbury, UK 
Company size: Small 
Number of employees: 10-50
Spend Network
Spend Network helps the public sector to spend more efficiently and helps
suppliers to compete for public sector contracts.
Spend Network is an innovative startup using public sector spending data to
develop new products and services. It aggregates public sector spending, tender
and contract data for the UK and EU from around 330 different sources, collected
through government websites, APIs and Freedom of Information requests.
Access to Spend Network’s data is provided via an API, which contains information
on the spending between UK public sector organisations and their suppliers for
over 30 million transactions, worth over £878bn. Typical services for businesses
include spending and contracting data analysis to forecast tender pricing and
timelines. Spend Network also helps the public sector to understand its spending
patterns and identify inefficiencies in the procurement process.
The company plans to launch a procurement pipeline product for public sector
organisations. The pipeline will visualise spending patterns in the public sector and
alert potential suppliers to contracting opportunities, helping them to better prepare
for and win public sector contracts.
Website: www.spendnetwork.com 
Twitter: @SpendNetwork 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/8/9
py
Number of employees: fewer than 10
Swirrl
Swirrl helps organisations organise and publish their data using open standards
that ensure it can be accessed and used by others.
Swirrl is a small technology company that provides open data publishing solutions
to make data easy to find, understand and reuse. Swirrl’s PublishMyData
platform is used by public and private sector groups to publish and manage their
data online in structured, machine-readable forms.
Swirrl helps publishers to meet open standards from the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C). It creates custom browsing and discovery features, such as
visualisations and applications, to ensure complex data can be used by non-
technical users.
Swirrl also provides training, consultancy and custom support services, to help
organisations better understand how to unlock the benefits of open data. The
company plans to release new features for both publishers and users to enable
data to be used more easily, and to help develop smart cities with its open data
expertise.
Website: swirrl.com 
Twitter: @swirrl 
Headquartered: Stirling, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
TransportAPI
TransportAPI unifies transport data from key industry sources to help individuals
and businesses to create new transport-related products and services.
TransportAPI is a transport solutions platform that seeks to create a single,
comprehensive source of UK transport information. It consolidates timetables,
routes, live running and performance history information for a wide range of
transport types, including cars, buses, trains and bicycles.
Open data from a number of sources is aggregated into Transport API’s unified
platform, accessible via an API. These sources include Transport for London (TfL),
the Department for Transport, Network Rail, Traveline and OpenStreetMap. Access
to the API is based on the usage rate required by the user, with free access
provided for limited use and different commercial packages available to users with
more advanced requirements.
Businesses can use Transport API’s accurate, detailed and timely transport

27/10/2022, 14:13Examples of UK companies using open data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg5/9/9
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
pyp
data for a range of commercial purposes, from advertising to journey planning. It
has fostered a network of over 1,100 developers and organisations that work with
the data to create apps and other services.
Website: transportapi.com 
Twitter: @TransportAPI 
Headquartered: London, UK 
Company size: Micro 
Number of employees: fewer than 10
Note: Company sizes are based on the European Commission’s Directorate
General for Enterprise and Industry’s classification of enterprise categories.
How to cite
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE

27/10/2022, 14:13Conclusions & recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg61/5
Conclusions & recommendations
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
This study has demonstrated the breadth and depth of business use of open
data.
Conclusions & recommendations
Conclusions
This study has demonstrated the breadth and depth of business use of open data.
The 270 open data companies we looked at ranged from startups to established
companies, from micro-businesses to large enterprises, and came from every
corner of the country.
Some companies, such as Arup and Spend Network, are using open data to help
them understand their markets, to build new products and services, and to give
them an edge over their competitors. Others, such as Swirrl and TransportAPI, are
finding a new market opportunity in providing the tools that help others to benefit
from open data. Innovators, such as Syngenta and GeoLytix, are adding value to
their business by publishing open data that everyone can benefit from.
Our research shows early evidence of the economic, social and environmental
benefits of open data beyond the new and existing businesses that it
enables. Adzuna uses open data to help job hunters find appropriate
work. Mime Consulting draws on open data to help students make informed
choices about their education and career choices. Shoothill provides
visualisations and tools based on open data to give a better understanding of the
risk and impact of flooding.
These companies are the first movers in a growing ecosystem. Our study reveals
that they are still predominantly technology companies, and focused in London. As
the utility of available open data grows, and as its potential is recognised, we
expect these biases to break down further. The diversity that this study has
revealed illustrates the potential for organisations of all shapes and sizes to
work with open data, not only for their own benefit, but for the benefit of our
economy, society and planet.
Our future research will aim to deepen our understanding of the nature and scale of
the value created by open data by quantifying the benefits that are being felt by
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:13Conclusions & recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg62/5
open data companies and their customers. We will examine more of the ways in
which UK companies work with open data, the barriers they face and how the
adoption of open data might be accelerated.
Recommendations for business
The open data companies featured in this report are varied in their size, location
and age, and showcase many different ways of using open data. The report
provides a basis for all companies to seek out, explore and learn from these
examples; to adapt the approaches for their own business or create completely
new ones.
Companies of all shapes and sizes can benefit from the opportunities that
open data brings. All companies can use open data when making strategic
decisions. Some may be able to use open data to improve or enhance existing
products and services. A few may discover new opportunities to act as
intermediaries, providing open data tools to a growing market. More may discover
the potential of publishing open data to better connect with customers, suppliers
and partners, or simply to demonstrate their corporate and social responsibility.
As a company, now is the time to get to grips with the opportunities that all kinds of
data – closed, shared and open – can bring to your business.
A good first step is to become familiar with the open data resources, from both
government and non-government sources, that you can use within your business.
Top of your list are likely to be demographic statistics from the Office of National
Statistics, and geospatial open data from Ordnance Survey and Open Street Map.
Other data will be sector specific, and while the government has adopted an open
by default policy in some cases you may need to request the data you need.
The Finding Open Data guide provides many useful starting points for locating and
requesting relevant data.
Developing your company’s capacity to take advantage of data, both at the
analytic and at the strategic level, is vital. To make the most of the potential that
data has to offer, your employees need to be able to work with data, understand
which data to trust, and incorporate data publication and use into your business
model. The ODI offers a range of courses suiting everyone from executives to
technicians, which can equip your business with the skills it needs.
As with any novel area, the best source of intelligence about the opportunities for
using open data, the barriers you will encounter, and how to surmount them, will
come from companies who are already on this journey. Whether these companies
are in your sector or beyond, forging connections with others who have
experienced similar challenges provides opportunities to learn and find potential
allies. Becoming an ODI Member is one way to connect with other organisations
who are working with open data.
The business opportunities around open data are boundless. At the ODI, we

27/10/2022, 14:13Conclusions & recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg63/5
ppp
want to learn more about the innovation, the challenges and the impact of open
data within companies. If you have an interesting story to share, or want to learn
more about how open data can benefit your business, please get in touch.
Recommendations for government
Open data is fueling new products and services from UK companies across every
sector. This study has shown that open data is a technology that can be used by
everyone.
The rapid growth of open data companies in the UK has been enabled in no small
part by strong political leadership on open data. Over the past decade,
successive UK governments have re-affirmed their commitment to open data as
raw material for innovation, and sought to put in place policies that help
government, businesses and people realise its benefits.
This study also tells us clearly that the UK open data environment can still be
improved. Some key findings have emerged from the issues encountered by
companies using open data.
Firstly, fundamental to a company’s ability to build viable products and services
using open data is certainty on two key points:
1. the data needed is made available as open data
2. it will continue to be made available as open data
Several companies interviewed noted that while data publication (‘getting the data
out there’) has been a priority for government, in many cases the data that has
most economic potential for companies is not available as open data (geospatial
data and address data cited as two examples). In some cases where the data was
available as open data, companies could not be sure it would continue to be
published.
Secondly, where companies could identify open data for potential use, several
factors influence their ability to innovate. While a range of issues were
acknowledged by companies surveyed, three key issues emerged:
1. lack of accuracy and poor quality of the data
2. licensing of the data
3. ease of access to that data
These are areas that require further attention by data publishers, to maximise
reuse. Ultimately, while open data is being used by a significant number of UK
companies to underpin new products and services, its foundations can be fragile.
Data quality and reliability issues continue to hinder innovation.
We therefore recommend that government continues to release as open data the
datathatcompaniescanbenefitfrominparticularexpandingtherangeof

27/10/2022, 14:13Conclusions & recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg64/5
data that companies can benefit from, in particular expanding the range of
geospatial data that is available and working towards the release of open address
data.
Further, we recommend that government should tackle the issues of accuracy,
quality and reliable access to data. The ODI’s Open Data Certificates provide a
measure of the quality of availability of open data and can provide detailed
recommendations for improvements for individual datasets.
Improved open data reliability could also be supported by the government
encouraging or mandating the use of open data in its own decision making:
– Ian Makgill, Spend Network
Ministers, for example, could require the inclusion of the data and analysis
underpinning any policy decision to be published as open data, as part of any
impact assessment. This would serve to stimulate the release of data that is
important to policy decisions (and therefore in the public interest), to encourage
government to adopt evidence-based policy making, and to improve the quality and
availability of data from the public sector.
While this study has shown wide use of open data by companies within the UK, a
direct result of the open data policies that have been put in place by the
government over the last five years. But there is still more to do to improve the
quality of publication, to make public sector open data a source that companies can
rely on.
How to cite:
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
“What if the government actually used open data for
making decisions? Wouldn’t it get better? If there’s a spend
analysis tool that’s out there that’s actually really good,
either open up that data or use your statements to do your
spend analysis. If [government] really want to improve the
quality of open data, use it.”
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:14Appendices – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg8/1/3
Appendices
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
Authors, editor, web production, acknowledgements, list of interview
participants and related resources.
Appendices
Authors
Jack Hardinges
Jamie Fawcett
Elpida Prasopoulou
Tom Heath
Jeni Tennison
Ellen Broad
Amanda Smith
Editor
Anna Scott
Web production
Kathryn Corrick
Phil Lang
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the contribution to this research of:
All featured companies, survey and interview participants
Contributors to the database of open data companies
The GovLab‘s Open Data 500 team, on whose work some of our survey
questions were based
Members of the ODI team: Anna Scott, Emma Thwaites, Gavin Starks, Helen
Desmond, Jeni Tennison, Kathryn Corrick and Phil Lang
The OpenDataMonitor project, funded by the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme for research, technological development and
demonstration under grant agreement no 611988, which has supported this
researchinpart
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:14Appendices – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg8/2/3
research in part.
List of interview participants
Adzuna: James Neave, Head of Data Science
Arup: Volker Buscher, Director
Doorda: Clifford McDowell, CEO & Founder
FoodTrade: Ed Dowding, CEO & Founder
Geolytix: Sarah Hitchcock, Partner
Mime Consulting: Steve Preston, Director
Open Utility: James Johnston, CEO & Co-Founder
OpenCorporates: Chris Taggart, CEO & Co-Founder
OpenSensors.io: Yodit Stanton, CEO & Founder
Shoothill: Rod Plummer, Managing Director
Spend Network: Ian Makgill, Managing Director
Swirrl: Bill Roberts, Founder
Related resources
All resources are provided under a Creative Commons – Attribution 4.0 (CC BY
4.0) licence.
Database of open data companies
View as a Google Sheet.
Download all tables as .xlsx.
Please visit spreadsheet to download individual tables in .csv format.
Tables featured or referenced in the report
View as Google Sheet.
Download all tables as .xlsx or .pdf.
Please visit spreadsheet to download individual tables in .csv format.
Survey sent to participating open data companies
View as Google Doc.
Available to download as .pdf.
All graphics are made available on GitHub
Licensing attributions
The summary and section on the diversity of open data companies contain:
Maps which use map tiles by Stamen Design, under CC BY 3.0. Data
by OpenStreetMap, under ODbL (Open Data Commons Open Database
License).
The section on the diversity of open data companies and appendices
tablescontain:

27/10/2022, 14:14Appendices – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg8/3/3
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
tables contain:
Analysis adapted from data from the Office for National Statistics licensed
under the Open Government Licence v.3.0.
UK Business: Activity, Size and Location, 2013
Analysis of country and regional distribution (for Great Britain) and the London
borough distribution based on data from the Office for National
Statistics licensed under the Open Government Licence and the Ordnance
Survey OpenData Licence.
National Statistics Postcode Lookup (NSPL) Feb 2015
Public database contains:
Data from, and data adapted from, Companies House.
Data adapted from data from the Office for National Statistics licensed under
the Open Government Licence v.3.0
ONS broad industry groups from UK Business: Activity, Size and Location,
2013
UK SIC Code 2007 from UK Standard Industrial Classification of Economic
Activities 2007 (UK SIC 2007) – Summary of structure
How to cite this report
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE

27/10/2022, 14:14Methodology – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg7/1/4
Methodology
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
Our research followed a mixed-methods design and was organised in three
consecutive phases — identifying, surveying and interviewing open data
companies.
Methodology
Our research followed a mixed-methods design and was organised in three
consecutive phases — identifying, surveying and interviewing open data
companies – as summarised in Figure 7.1 below:
our research into UK open data companies
This blend of desk research, surveying and interviews is conducive to studying an
emerging phenomenon (Hesse-Bider, 2010) — in this case the commercial
exploitation of open data. Specifically, it enabled us to gather and analyse a
breadth of data covering both quantitative characteristics of UK open data
companies and qualitative accounts of their perspectives and experiences.
Identifying UK open data companies
In the first phase of the study we used desk research to identify companies working
with open data in the UK. Initially, we aggregated information from internal
resources, such as the ODI membership and contact directories, to identify and
develop a working list of candidate ‘entities’. At this stage of the research we kept a
wide variety of entity types in scope including, for example, individual developers,
companies not registered in the UK and charities. Analysis of publicly-available
sources, such as data.gov.uk case studies, enabled us to increase this candidate
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:14Methodology – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg7/2/4
list to include 739 entities.
We then conducted extensive additional desk research using open data from
Companies House and the Office for National Statistics to collect specific pieces of
data about each entity, such as legal company type and trading status. Using
publicly accessible sources we developed our own descriptions of the entity and
their open data usage. We also identified trading addresses and relevant contacts’
names and email addresses from public sources.
In order to limit our broader candidate list to valid UK open data companies we then
developed and applied the following selection criteria:
1. Must have a UK company number
2. Must be an active company
3. Must not have a dormant UK Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code
4. Must be a valid company type (Community Interest Company, Industrial and
Provident Society, Limited Liability Partnership, PRI/LBG/NSC, PRI/LTD BY
GUAR/NSC, Private Limited Company or Public Limited Company)
5. Must not be a registered charity
Applying these criteria reduced the candidate list from 739 entities to 399
companies potentially working with open data in some capacity.
Surveying UK open data companies
In September 2014 we launched a survey to further explore how UK companies
were working with open data. The survey targeted the companies on our filtered
candidate list, with the exception of 15 for whom contact details were not available.
This left a target group of 384 companies who we invited by email to complete the
survey. This invitation was sent on 2014-09-23.
At this stage, we also made the candidate list of UK open data companies available
through the ODI website, to give companies the opportunity to see the information
we had collected about them and their involvement with open data, and to provide
us with feedback. We sent two reminder emails at 10 day intervals, on 2014-10-03
and 2014-10-13, before closing the survey on 2014-11-01.
In creating the survey, we followed Couper (2011) to produce an instrument that
addressed pertinent issues while maximising response rates among very busy
professionals. The questions were informed by systematic survey of open data
literature (academic, government and industry) to identify the core themes in the
field, and designed to cover various aspects of commercial open data activities,
such as revenue streams, pricing mechanisms, datasets used, products and
services developed, and challenges related to open data reuse.
We received 77 survey responses from those companies invited to participate via
email, which represents a response rate of 20%. An open call to complete the
surveywasalsolaunchedviathe@ODIHQTwitteraccount,resultinginfive

27/10/2022, 14:14Methodology – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg7/3/4
survey was also launched via the @ODIHQ Twitter account, resulting in five
additional completed surveys and 82 responses in total. We then aggregated and
cleansed these to remove duplicate, incomplete and/or inadequate responses,
leaving 79 valid responses for analysis.
We analysed the resulting data using the ‘R’ statistics package and Google Sheets.
A number of questions, primarily those involving free text answers, required a
degree of re-coding. This was carried out to align, where possible, very specific free
text answers with existing broader categories, in order for them to be included in
the quantitative analysis. Logical inconsistencies between questions were also
corrected. For example, where a respondent listed (in response to Question 10)
non-government datasets they use, but failed to indicate in response to Question 9
that they use non-government datasets, we re-coded the response to Question 9 to
give an affirmative answer.
For question 14 we asked companies to indicate the importance of eight different
aspects of open data to their engagement. To analyse these together to look at
relative importance meant we could only use companies which provided answers to
all eight parts. In some cases companies answered some but not all questions. In
order to maximise the analysis and include as wide a range of opinions as possible
we used imputation. This entailed replacing missing values where companies had
answered a majority of the parts (5, 6 or 7). The missing values were replaced by
the mean of the other answers to that part so that the analysis would not be greatly
affected.
Some questions with non-numeric responses required grouping similar answers
into categories in order to enable meaningful analysis. For example, in questions 8
and 10, responses were grouped by data provider in order to identify how often
each supplier was mentioned by companies. This involved recognising and
grouping together suppliers who were mentioned in a variety of ways, for example
“Ordnance Survey”, “OS” and examples of specific datasets such as “Codepoint”.
Interviewing UK open data companies
Following collection of the survey responses, we conducted follow-up interviews
with 12 companies who had completed the survey. This enabled us to gain further
insights into their work with open data.
We selected companies for interview from a range of industry sectors, and who
play varied roles within the ecosystem. In addition, we endeavoured to select
companies with innovative products and services that have the potential to grow or
scale in the future. This enabled us to further explore factors which may encourage
or stifle more widespread commercial reuse of open data.
The interview questions followed the themes of the survey questionnaire. However,
we adopted an open ended interview format to encourage interviewees to elaborate
on their work with open data. All interviews were completed either in person or via
Skypeandlastedbetween30and60minutes

27/10/2022, 14:14Methodology – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg7/4/4
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
Skype and lasted between 30 and 60 minutes.
The interviews were recorded and transcribed for analysis according to the topics
covered in the survey (Saldaña, 2009). New themes also emerged from these
interviews, adding further insight to the survey responses. In particular, these
concerned the challenges facing open data companies, including discontinuous
publishing and the need for more data to be published.
The data from the interviews was used, in part, to write the UK open data company
use cases and provide a snapshot of their experiences with open data.
Refining the list of UK open data companies
Following completion of the survey and interviews we re-evaluated the 399
companies included in our original candidate list to ensure there was sufficient
publicly-documented evidence of their work with open data to warrant inclusion in
the final list. This process resulted in the set of 270 companies you can find in
the public database. Open data about these companies, sourced from Companies
House, informed our analysis of the the scope and diversity of open data
companies in the UK.
References
Couper, Mick P. (2011). The Future of Modes of Data Collection. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 75(5): 889–908.
Hesse‐Biber, S.N. (2010). Mixed Methods Research: Merging Theory with Practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Saldaña, J. (2009). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. London: Sage.
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE