



Contents
Executive summary3
Background4
Approach5
Using challenges to drive innovation that
solves problems5
Unlocking data on brownfield sites6
Creating a standard to help people find
construction knowledge7
Creating a digital version of a city8
Sharing data to improve the safety of lives at sea8
Building data literacy and skills9
Desk research and interviews10
Workshop11
Roundtable12
What data skills and knowledge are needed to improve access, use
and sharing of data in the engineering sector?12
How well are data literacy needs already supported?12
What steps do we need to take to improve the support available
around data skills and knowledge in the sector?13
Conclusion14
Endorse our manifesto15
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   1

About
This report was produced as part of a project funded by Lloyd’s Register
Foundation. It builds on research from the Open Data Institute’sSharing
engineering data for the public goodproject, alsofunded by Lloyd’s Register
Foundation. The views in this report are those of the authors.
This report was researched and produced by the Open Data Institute,
and published in March 2021. Its lead authors are Deborah Yates and
James Maddison, with contributions from Jeni Tennison and Mahlet Zimeta.
If you would like to share feedback or get in touch, pleasecontact James
Maddison.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   2

Executive summary
This report is the result of a project by the Open Data Institute (ODI), funded by
Lloyd’s Register Foundation, which began in December 2019. The project follows
our previous collaboration, which exploredhow sharingengineering data can
create public good, by building on two key principlesoutlined in ourmanifesto for
sharing engineering data:
●
Use challenges to drive innovation that solves problemsby supporting
four project teams to explore how better access, use and sharing of data
can contribute to public safety.
●
Build data literacy and skillsby assessing the currentstate of play of
data skills in the sector.
This project demonstrates that there is a clear appetite for improving access,
use and sharing of engineering data, but that there has been a general lack of
coordination across the sector to drive it forwards. The four funded projects
demonstrate that the principles outlined in the manifesto can provide a pathway
to achieving impact with data, and that working towards one principle can unlock
value in other areas of the manifesto.
The report recognises that there is a long way to go before the engineering sector
is able to fully realise the value of wider data sharing. In particular, data literacy
and skills across the engineering sector need to be improved. To enable this,
continuing professional development (CPD) providers need to offer courses that
have data literacy and skills built in.
We urge engineering organisations to consider how they can support the
manifesto going forwards, whether through advocating for open or shared data,
enabling innovation by supporting new projects or building data skills
within your organisation. If you would like to discuss how you could act on the
recommendations outlined in the manifesto, pleaseget in touch.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   3

Background
In December 2018, the ODI began a collaborationwithLloyd’s Register
Foundation, an independent global charity that supportsresearch, innovation and
education to make the world a safer place. explores how sharing engineering data
could benefit the public, with a particular focus on public safety and safety in the
workplace. It culminated in the creation of a jointinsight report, which includes our
manifesto for sharing engineering data. The principlesand actions within the
manifesto are:
1.Data is infrastructure
2.Data must be stewarded
3.Opening and sharing data unlocks value
4.Explore new data sharing models
5.Use challenges to drive innovation that solves problems
6.Regulation must adapt to new technologies and uses of data
7.Build data literacy and skills
8.Ensure data is used legally and ethically
9.Share knowledge and insight
Applying these principles is a vital step in enabling organisations to create
maximum value from data, for the public good. This set of principles and actions
has so far been endorsed by 18 leading organisations from the sector
To demonstrate how these principles can contribute to the public good, the ODI
and Lloyd’s Register Foundation extended their collaboration into 2019. Our aim
was to explore how we could enable the sector to deliver on the manifesto by:
●
supporting innovative projects with an emphasis on safety
●
increasing access to data
●
supporting the sharing of data
●
producing tools and guidance that enable others to publish or
share data themselves.
We have also worked with key stakeholders to examine the extent of data literacy
and skills in the engineering sector, with a view towards working with training and
accreditation providers to build data literacy and skills into their continuing
professional development (CPD) offerings.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   4

Approach
We focused on addressing two core principles of the manifesto: ‘Use challenges
to drive innovation that solves problems’ and ‘Building data literacy and skills’.
Use challenges to drive innovation that
solves problems
Open innovation can enable new solutions to pressing social, economic or
environmental challenges, like improving safety in the workplace or on our
road networks.
To drive innovation through a challenge-led approach, the manifesto
recommends that:
●
Governments and civil society should work together to identify social,
economic and environmental challenges that might be addressed through
innovative approaches.
●
Funders should invest in programmes that enable collaboration across the
private sector, startups and researchers to solve specific challenges
through the better use of data.
●
Funders should help innovators to scale and develop their solutions by
supporting the creation of the data infrastructure needed to underpin new
products and services.
For this project, we focused on how funding could support the development of
new solutions to problems and enable greater collaboration across the
engineering sector. We invited external organisations to present their ideas for new
projects and ways of working that would advancetheLloyd’s Register Foundation
strategyand deliver on the vision of ourshared manifesto.The invitation to tender
was open to any public or private sector organisation, in the UK or internationally,
in order to maximise the global impact of the funding and support.
The new stimulus fund offered a total of £150,000 of funding for up to six projects.
The successful organisations would help to deliver on the recommendations in the
manifesto by:
●
exploring innovative ways to improve safety, in line with the mission of the
Lloyd’s Register Foundation.
●
increasing access to data by supporting the publication of open data or
sharing of data, across the public and/or private sector.
●
encouraging collaboration across organisations, for instance, by building
new data infrastructure, or exploring new ways to govern and steward
data such as data trusts.
●
demonstrating the value of open approaches by encouraging the creation
of openly licensing outputs, tools and guidance.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   5

Applicants were assessed based on the following criteria:
●
Alignment with the Foundation strategy.Proposalsshould clearly
demonstrate how they would support at least one aspect of the
Foundation strategy.
●
Alignment with our manifesto.Proposals are requiredto clearly
demonstrate how they plan to deliver on specific principles within
the manifesto.
●
Clarity of the proposal.Project ideas need to beclearly scoped, have
well-defined activities and outcomes and be deliverable within a
six-month timeframe.
●
Ability to deliver.The organisation making the proposalmust
demonstrate that they have the capacity and resources to deliver on the
project within the funded period.
●
Adoption of open approaches.Projects need to havea commitment to
using one or more open approaches, such as publication of shared and
open data, use of open standards and open innovation.
●
Value for money.Projects need to deliver clear value,useful outputs and
insights.
With this criteria in mind,five projects were chosento receive funding and
support, to further their ambitious ideas for improving safety. However, due to
Covid-19-related constraints,, we were unable to support one of the projects – The
Office for National Statistics’sData Science Campuscollaboration with the Royal
Air Force.
The four successful projects were:
●
Unlocking data on brownfield sites, led byAtkins
●
Creating a standard to help people find construction knowledge, led by
Barbal
●
Creating a digital version of a city, led bySlingshotSimulations
●
Sharing data to improve the safety of lives at sea, led by theGeoData
Institute
Unlocking data on brownfield sites
Area of the manifesto explored: Opening and sharing data unlocks value
There are over 1.1 million households in England on the social housing waiting list,
even though there is enough brownfield land – land that is not currently in use, but
could potentially be contaminated – to build an estimated 1 million homes.
Benefiting from the stimulus fund, the engineering and design consultancy
company Atkins undertook a discovery project to identify how open datasets
can be used to develop insights into contamination of brownfield sites.
It then compared this approach with similar approaches that could be taken, using
existing commercial and unused datasets.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   6

Key findings from the project:
●
Critical sources of contamination are currently only found in
non-open datasets.
●
Existing datasets could be made more open to help improve decision
making and reduce costs associated with developing brownfield sites,
particularly for smaller developers, and help address the national
housing crisis.
●
There is unused data held by companies like Atkins and its customers
which, if shared in ways that built trust, could unlock further value.
●
There is an opportunity for industry to collaborate and realise the power
of location data about brownfield land contaminants. These conversations
will be important in supporting Government housing commitments and
delivering the ambitions in theUK Geospatial DataStrategy.
For more information about the project, please readour case study,
the Atkinsproject reportor watch thelunchtime lecturepresentation.
Creating a standard to help people find
construction knowledge
Area of the manifesto explored: Data is infrastructure
A third of construction practitioners (approximately 1 million people) do not have
easy access to the knowledge they need to do their job. The number one barrier
to access is that practitioners are not aware of what knowledge is available.
There is therefore a need for quick and straightforward access to knowledge
on demand.
Barbal, a Bristol based enterprise specialising in creating open standards for data,
worked with theConstruction Knowledge Task Groupto collaboratively publish
construction knowledge so that it becomes discoverable. In time, this will greatly
improve practitioners’ access to the knowledge they need to safely perform their
role and implement a safer built environment during construction and in-use.
Key findings from the project:
●
Taking an open and collaborative approach accelerates the development
of technical solutions in the construction industry.
●
Staying up to date with the latest regulations and best practice ensures
industry professionals are competent to deliver safer buildings.
●
Barbal’s approach to improving discovery of construction knowledge
could be the basis of a global coalition for change for construction
knowledge professionals.
For more information about the project, please readour case studyor watch the
lunchtime lecture presentation.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   7

Creating a digital version of a city
Area of the manifesto explored: Opening and sharing data unlocks value
Air pollution is one of the leading contributors to increased mortality around the
world, with established links to numerous heart and respiratory diseases. Roughly
7 million deaths a year are caused by air pollution andmore than 80% of people
who are affected by poor air quality live in urban areas, such as cities. Decision
makers in cities must do more to mitigate poor air quality and protect citizens by
making better decisions around city planning.
The ’Breathing City’ project – an initiative led by Slingshot Simulations –
demonstrates how open data can be used to create a digital representation of a
city, which can provide valuable insights about the impact of pollution, and help
decision makers to improve the wellbeing and safety of city populations.
Key findings from the project:
●
Slingshot Simulations has created a digital twin of Leeds city centre, using
multiple open data sources, which can be used to understand the
challenges faced around air pollution in the city.
●
The digital twin enables city decision makers to simulate different
scenarios in which changes to city infrastructure could have a significant
impact on the effects of air pollution.
●
The digital twin has the potential to be rolled out across different cities,
with a reusable simulation being produced as part of the project.
Newcastle-under-Lyme council has approached the team to explore
replicating this in Staffordshire.
●
Slingshot’s work has created a foundation for helping city planners in a
world impacted by the coronavirus, which will be further explored through
its follow-on projectA Living Model for People andPlace, which is funded
by Innovate UK and supported by the University of Leeds VirtuoCity
Centre for City Simulation, Leeds City Council and Newcastle-under-Lyme
Borough Council.
For more information about the project, please readour case studyor watch the
lunchtime lecture presentation.
Sharing data to improve the safety of lives at sea
Area of the manifesto explored: Explore new data sharing models
As an island nation, the UK sees numerous coastal incidents and emergencies
every year. In 2019, Royal National Lifeboat Institute (RNLI) lifeguardsresponded
to 17,356 incidents near the shore and lifeboat crews were launched 8,941 times
in response to incidents at sea.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   8

The Open Marine Data project, led by the GeoData Institute based at the
University of Southampton, supports emergency responders to improve access
to the data that they collect, with a view to providing an open marine dataset for
use by the whole sector. This will enable innovators to create new tools and
approaches that support emergency responders to make better decisions.
Key findings from the project:
●
There is an opportunity to improve the way that data is shared between
key emergency response stakeholders, such as the Maritime Coastguard
Agency (MCA) and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI). Data is
currently shared manually. To improve data sharing, MCA is looking to
adopt the Multi Agency Incident Transfer (MAIT) schema,
a standardised UK government format for sharing incident data,
which enables device-to-device data transfer without the need for
human involvement.
●
Currently the MCA and RNLI collect different records of a particular
incident, which means that often, neither organisation has a complete
picture. Because this data is not collected in a standardised format, it can
be difficult for the organisations to use the data that is being shared.
●
The GeoData team has created a blueprint for these organisations to
adopt a standardised approach to collecting data, which will help to
resolve most of the existing issues that prevent data from easily being
shared, such as ambiguity around the location of an incident and a lack
of common understanding around attributes.
●
The blueprint lays the foundation for development of an open
marine-incident data standard, which can be adopted by other emergency
responders working in the marine sector. The standard will enable
responders to publish open data about incidents for others to use and
learn from.
For more information about the project, please readour case study.
Building data literacy and skills
Organisations need the capacity to make use of data and an understanding of
how to share it safely. To achieve this, data literacy and skills need to increase
across the engineering professions and organisations, and a range of stakeholders
need to collaborate.
To help build data literacy and skills in the engineering sector, the
manifesto recommends:
●
Professional bodies and societies should ensure that their professional
development and certification courses are building data skills
●
Universities and research organisations must ensure that they are teaching
the necessary data skills required for the future of the profession
●
Private sector companies should design their internal skills and learning
programmes to build an understanding of the value of data at all levels of
their organisation.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   9

Our work in this area focused on validating these three points, by providing
evidence for the need and demand for data skills to the relevant stakeholders
listed above.
We first undertook a review of the available training, support and guidance for
engineers regarding access, use and sharing of data. We conducted this research
using a combined approach of desk research and expert interviews. Insights from
both elements informed the structure and focus of a workshop, which convened a
multi-stakeholder group from across the sector. Based on the findings from the
workshop, a roundtable was convened with engineering CPD providers to explore
opportunities for adding data skills to existing CPD offerings.
Desk research and interviews
Our research on data literacy and skills in the engineering sector focused on two
key questions:
●
What codes of practice or guidance are available to organisations in the
engineering space around accessing, using and sharing data?
●
What training courses or certification are available to organisations in the
engineering space around accessing, using and sharing data?
The desk research uncovered a number of gaps in guidance, training and skills,
which were used as the basis of questions for seven expert interviews, with a
focus on current best practice. We engaged with a range of stakeholders working
in the sector, including a regulator, funder, research organisation and construction
firm, as well as with organisations that play an advisory role to the sector.
Key insights from the research:
●
There is little generic guidance or training around data in the engineering
sector. Most organisations follow the rules outlined in the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), and may have internal guidelines around
accessing, using and sharing data.
●
Some organisations have their own training programmes around data,
but they are not always mandatory. There are a small number of
organisations that offer external guidance, such as Royal Academy
of Engineering’s ‘Towards Trusted Data Sharing’ work.
●
Interviewees agreed that data guidance needs to be embedded into
everyday engineering practices, and that people working in the sector
need to be able to understand the value of data for their role and
organisation. If organisations are to invest in upskilling staff in data
knowledge and skills, it needs to be aimed at addressing specific
business or organisational problems or opportunities.
●
Data is rarely well understood across the organisation, which means
that culture change around data and digital is driven by a few individuals,
and seldom by those at the top of the organisation.
●
There is sometimes a disconnect in understanding between departments
or roles, which can cause miscommunication and a misinterpretation of
each other’s needs.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   10

Workshop
To build on and validate the findings from our early research, we facilitated a
workshop to explore the extent of support, training and guidance for data literacy
and skills in the engineering sector.
The workshop included nine participants from nine organisations:
OrganisationOrganisation roleAttendee Role
Health & Safety ExecutiveRegulatorSenior Scientist
Colouring London/Alan Turing
Institute
ResearcherProgramme Director
EPSRCFunderSenior Portfolio Manager
GeoData InstituteCreatorEnterprise Fellow
AtkinsSteward/CreatorData Scientist
Mission DriveData skills
consultant
Data Skills Consultant
Lloyd’s Register FoundationFunderProgramme Manager
RAEng – Engineering XResearcherSenior Manager
TidewayStewardEngineering Information Manager
Together with these stakeholders, we discussed the role that data plays in the
everyday work of engineers; examined the balance of data skills needed across
engineering organisations; and discussed how existing support compares to the
needs of the sector, in order to inform interventions that would drive greater use
and sharing of data.
While it was felt that in some areas data skills and knowledge were fairly strong, the
general consensus from participants was that the level of data skills and knowledge
across the sector needs to be improved and requires more investment. The group
also agreed that the level of support available was not currently sufficient.
For more information about the findings of the workshop, please read our
workshop report.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   11

Based on the findings from this workshop, we made recommendations on next
steps to be delivered over the short term (within six months) and long term
(beyond six months). These recommendations include:
1.Producing a white paper on data skills in engineering.
2.Convening a roundtable meeting with engineering CPD providers to
explore opportunities for adding data skills to existing CPD offerings.
3.Working with universities, research organisations and professional bodies
to increase capacity in data skills and knowledge.
4.Developing an ‘introduction to data in engineering’ learning programme.
We decided to focus on the roundtable with CPD providers for the remainder of
the project. By convening organisations that offer training and support to the
sector, we sought to understand how they incorporate data literacy and skills into
their offerings.
Roundtable meeting
At the beginning of February 2021, we brought together representatives from
three engineering institutes that provide CPD opportunities for the engineering
sector, to explore opportunities for improving the provision of data skills and
literacy support.
We framed discussions around three key questions:
What data skills and knowledge are needed to improve access, use
and sharing of data in the engineering sector?
Participants felt that data skills were becoming increasingly important for people
working in the engineering sector. They recognised the importance of technical
data skills, such as using platforms or analysing data, but they were less familiar
with strategic data skills, such as managing organisational change or delivering
policies with data. The group acknowledged the importance of building strategic
data skills in parallel with technical skills to ensure that the curation and use of
data is valued at all levels of an organisation.
How well are data literacy needs already supported?
Most CPD providers offer training and accreditation that applies specifically to
a job role or domain, but it was clear that these courses rarely help people to
consider how skills to access, use and share data applies to their context.
Many CPD providers are already in a good position to provide relevant sector
or role-specific guidance, but would need to invest time and resources in their
own training staff, so that they could incorporate data skills and literacy into
their courses.
Participants suggested that they would need to see more demand from
engineering organisations for data literacy and skills support in order to invest
in changes to their offerings.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   12

What steps do we need to take to improve the support available
around data skills and knowledge in the sector?
The first step for many CPD providers will be to examine existing data skills and
data literacy gaps within their own offerings. Participants suggested that while
they were aware that their courses and training did not cover data skills in detail,
they were not sure where to begin. Leaders within CPD organisations can support
this change by investing in the data literacy of learning and development
specialists, who develop the courses and deliver the training to customers in the
engineering sector.
By building data skills and literacy internally, CPD providers will be able to embed
modules covering access, use and sharing of data within existing training and
courses. This will help the engineering sector understand how better data
practices can support their work.
For more information about the findings from this workshop, please read our blog
post onimproving data skills in the engineering sector.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   13

Conclusion
The most important insight from our work exploring data sharing in the
engineering sector is that there is a clear appetite from organisations to engage
more with data. There seems to have been a lack of coordination to realise the
ambition in the past, but during this project, we have seen an enthusiasm for data
manifest in the following ways:
●
The initial wave of endorsement for the manifesto, from organisations
such as Health and Safety Executive, Royal Academy of Engineering and
Arup, gave us an indication that organisations in the engineering sector
are keen to explore the potential of using and sharing data.
Our engagement as part of this follow-on project, with a wide variety of
stakeholders, through interviews, a workshop and roundtable meeting,
has solidified that organisations are interested in being able to improve
how they use data to solve problems.
●
External engagement with project outputs demonstrates that people
want to learn how data can enable innovation, address challenges and
save lives. Our case studies, blogposts and lunchtime lecture videos
associated with the stimulus fund projects have received a combined
figure of over 2,000 views.
●
The expression of interest in joining our stimulus fund – with applications
coming from 10 organisations – also suggests that engineering
organisations are ready to explore new approaches to data. This suggests
that many of the barriers to sharing data that have been cited to us in the
past (see our jointinsight report), such as commercialsensitivity and
concerns around public perception, become less of an issue when an
organisation is given the time and resources to explore the feasibility of a
new idea.
Not only has the ODI’s work with Lloyd’s Register Foundation demonstrated that
there is an appetite for better access, use and sharing of data in engineering, but
the outcomes of each stimulus fund project have shown that the principles
outlined in the manifesto can provide a pathway to achieving impact with data,
and that working towards one principle can unlock value in other areas of the
manifesto. For instance:
●
The project led byBarbalto create a shared way ofpublishing
construction knowledge is a great example of how treating data as
infrastructure, and creating rules around how we access and use it,
can lead to better access to knowledge and insight.
●
The projects led bySlingshot SimulationsandAtkinsboth demonstrate
how open and shared data from third party organisations can be used to
address societal challenges like air pollution and a lack of affordable
housing, in innovative new ways.
●
TheGeoData Institutehas been able to show that usingnew models for
sharing can help organisations to access and use data more effectively,
saving time and resources for all involved.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   14

We have also learned that there is still a long way to go before the engineering
sector is able to fully realise the value of wider data sharing. Our engagement
activities with people in engineering roles suggests that the level of data literacy
and skills across the sector needs improvement.
There is an opportunity for organisations that provide CPD to equip people in
engineering roles to understand the relationship between data and their work.
We encourage universities, research organisations and professional bodies that
deliver CPD support for the sector to consider how they can build data literacy by
building data skills into their existing offerings. There are tools available to help
with this assessment, such as the ODI’sData SkillsFramework, which can help
organisations to inform their data literacy programmes, identify skill gaps and
clarify the best places to invest in learning and capacity development.
Demonstrating demand for data literacy and skills will be an important motivator
for CPD providers to invest more in data-enabled courses and training.
Engineering organisations need to show CPD providers that there is a demand
for learning relevant data skills. Without more evidence of demand for data skills,
training providers might not be able to justify investing in adapting their offerings,
so engineering organisations must play a stronger role in advocating for more data
skills support.
Endorse our manifesto
Our work this year has demonstrated that following the principles outlined in the
manifesto for sharing engineering datacan help addressissues of safety, and that
improving how we access, use and share engineering data could be instrumental
in helping to solve other social and economic challenges in the sector.
The good news is that your organisation could be contributing to the public good
being created from data too.
Start by asking yourself one of the following questions:
●
Do you feel equipped to work with data in your role?
●
Could you be solving problems with the data that your organisation
collects?
●
Have you considered how sharing data can create value for
your organisation?
●
Do you offer courses and training for engineers that build data skills
and literacy?
●
Do you have a story to share about how engineering data can be used
for the public good?
We urge engineering organisations to consider how they can support the
manifesto, whether it be through advocacy for opening or sharing data, enabling
innovation through supporting projects with new ideas or building data skills within
your organisation. If you would like to discuss how you could endorse and act on
the recommendations outlined in the manifesto, pleaseget in touch.
Open Data Institute 2021 / Report#### Building on the manifesto for sharing engineering data #####   15