

1

Contents
1. Foreword4
2. Executive summary5
3. Introduction6
4. Opportunities for better data sharing across the built environment8
Operational carbon9
Embodied carbon13
Transparency16
Resilience18
5. Approaches for creating open and trustworthy data ecosystems20
Data infrastructure22
Developing infrastructure in the open22
Creating appropriate infrastructure24
Data institutions24
Connecting governance, regulation and technology25
From scraped datasets to trusted open infrastructures26
Data access and use initiatives27
Improving data discovery27
Fostering innovation and cooperation28
Data cultures: independent actions in a
vibrant ecosystem29
The journey towards data culture29
6. Summary and call to action30
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do2

About
Founded in 2012, the Open Data Institute (ODI) is an independent and
not-for-profit organisation based in London, UK. The ODI works with companies
and governments to build an open, trustworthy data ecosystem, where people can
make better decisions using data and manage any harmful impacts.
For over 75 years, Arup has been recognised for its vision, talent and tenacity.
Today, the firm is a collective of over 16,000 designers, advisors and experts
working across 140 countries.Founded to be a humaneorganisation, one
dedicated to excellent work across many disciplines, it collaborates with clients
and partners to shape a better world.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do3

1. Foreword
Foreword by Volker Buscher, Chief Data Officer, Arup Group
The Paris Agreement
1
is based on global climate modelsthat work. Governments and businesses have
agreed milestones for 2030 and 2050 that require us to act now. These climate goals require data that
is specific to key industries, users and asset investors. For example, what is the carbon risk for an
asset manager? How do property owners design and manage these assets? What is the role of the
consumer or employee in the drive for net-zero properties? These questions apply across the built
environment, including buildings, transportation, utilities, cities and agriculture.
Solving the climate emergency requires creativity in how we collect, use and share ‘data at scale’. Data
at scale has been transforming retail, banking and media for the past two decades. The built
environment is now going through a similar transformation by combining high volume, variety and
velocity of data with machine integrated data processing in architecture, engineering and asset
management. A process that will unlock economic, environment and social growth.
For Arup this means investing in our data infrastructure and science, innovation, knowledge, culture
and practices. But we are not an island and data sharing across the industry is vital. For example one
of our early prototypes for data-enabled innovation addressed agent-based transport models. We
spend 60% or our time on data ingestion and cleansing, due to inefficient bilateral data sharing,
instead of focusing our entire efforts on climate-positive transport planning.
And it is not just the cost and friction regarding the use of data at scale in design and management of
the built or natural world. It is also the economic opportunity for growth and innovation. Open banking
2
has grown into a $43bn
3
data-at-scale industry. Howbig is the opportunity for tech investors in the
built and natural world? Can the emerging PropTech (property technology), ConstructionTech
(construction technology), CleanTech (technology that aims to improve environmental sustainability) etc
match what open banking has delivered?
This has led to our call for collaboration with the ODI as part of our research programme Data
Supernova
4
. Our first research initiative focusedon ‘Exploring new approaches for sharing data in the
built environment’
5
. This time our aim is to understandbetter the role data at scale can play in dealing
with embodied carbon, operational carbon, human behaviour, resilience and transparency.
We would like to understand better why data matters in climate change. We would like to apply the
ODI’s theory of change
6
as a catalyst for the builtworld to develop the data foundations required to
unlock the economic and environmental value generated by data at scale.
6
ODI (2018),Theory of change
5
ODI (2021)Exploring new approaches for sharing datain the built environment
4
The Alan Turing Institute (2020),Volker Buscherand the Data Supernova
3
Allied Market Research (2020),Open Banking MarketSize, Share | Opportunity, Trend and
Growth 2026
2
Dgen (2018),Development of UK open banking
1
United Nations Climate Change (2015),The Paris Agreement
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do4

2. Executive summary
In 2021, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
7
confirmed that human
activities are having a profound impact on the planet, and will inform the global
negotiations at Cop26
8
, to accelerate the journeyto net zero and keep the
increase in temperature above pre-industrial levels to less than1.5°C.
‘Pre-industrial levels’ refers to the approximation of the surface air temperature of
this era from the IPCC 'Global warming of 1.5°C' report
9
.As with other significant
challenges we face,effective use of data is becomingcentral to delivering
emission cuts, and doing so in ways that deliver wider environmental, social and
economic value. Data is increasingly seen as a powerful tool in solving societal
challenges, which becomes even more powerful when standardised and shared in
ways that meet a wide range of user needs.
At the moment there are growing concerns in the built environment in relation to
the lack of accessible, reliable and trusted data and the missed opportunities for
using it to develop innovative products and services. As such, we recognise the
potential to improve the underlying data infrastructure across the sector, drawing
on learning from other domains, and exploring some of the approaches needed to
rapidly move towards realising these.
With this in mind, we examined several particular challenges, including bringing
together data on the existing built environment to support strategic action and
investment, and unlocking greater building and house-level data to support
individual choices around energy saving and retrofit strategies. We identified the
need to improve standards and working practices and the challenges relating to
reliable and trustworthy carbon calculation, while pointing to the potential for
modern data stewardship practices to address some of these.
And finally, we looked at the importance of bringing in data from other settings
and sectors, working across professional and organisational boundaries. Some of
the challenges are technical, some are political, and others are around culture and
capacity, and they cannot be solved by organisations acting alone.
The need for urgent action on climate change is no longer a matter of debate.
The question now for the built-environment sector is how to accelerate action to
reduce emissions, build for resilience and protect biodiversity. We need to use all
the tools at our disposal, including the significant power of data. Meeting this
challenge demands coordination, cooperation, community building and culture
9
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2019).   Global Warming of 1.5 ºC
8
United Nations (2021),COP26: It's (almost) here
7
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2021),Sixth Assessment Report: AR6 Climate Change
2021:The Physical Science Basis
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do5

change across the sector, and for cross-sector collaboration to break down data
silos.
This draft paper also launches a call for collaboration – we are asking
organisations and individuals to take action:
-Give us your feedback on this working paperto help focus future data
collaborations and activities.Fill out this formby 19 November 2021 to send
your feedback.
3. Introduction
The data is clear. We face a climate and biodiversity emergency.
10
Data that
has been gathered, curated and analysed by thousands of scientists across the
world has established the greenhouse gas cuts that we need over the next decade
to keep global temperature rises below 1.5 degrees. Effective use of data is now
central to delivering those cuts, and doing so in ways that deliver wider
environmental, social and economic value.
The built environment contributes around 40% of the UK’s total carbon
footprint
11
(and a similar figure worldwide
12
), througha mix of embodied carbon in
new construction, and operational carbon used to heat and power existing
buildings. Add in the emissions from road and rail transportation, and the majority
of emissions are shaped by choices made in the design and operation of our
building and infrastructure. The UK Institute of Civil Engineers estimates that,
whilst some progress has been made, we‘need to reducethe UK’s annual carbon
emissions from infrastructure more than 30% faster than we are doing now”and
although some of the needed reductions rely on substantial technological and
policy shifts, decarbonisation can also be accelerated by“such mundane
measures as better data management.’
13
Data is a powerful tool. And it is made even morepowerful when it is
standardised and shared in ways that meet a wide range of user needs. The ODI’s
experience over the last nine years has shown that, when intentional design,
investment and energy is put into creating effective data ecosystems, supported
by the right mix of openness, incentives and data institutions, data can deliver a
step-change in how problems are solved.
13
Institute of Civil Engineers (2021)State of theNation 2021 | Six ways for civil engineers to act on
climate change
12
World GBC (2021),The building and construction sectorcan reach net zero carbon
emissions by 2050
11
UKGBC (2019),Climate change
10
Built Environment Declares (2021),Built EnvironmentDeclares Climate and Biodiversity Emergency
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do6

Across the built-environment sector there are common concerns about a
lack of accessible, reliable and trusted data. Thedata ecosystem for
decarbonising the built environment has developed over many years, reliant on
scattered spreadsheets, ad-hoc research projects, proprietary databases and
conflicting calculations, leading to a landscape in which targets are hard to both
reliably set, and measure. For emerging big data, the Internet of Things, sensor
network and real-time data sources, questions over standardisation, privacy
protections and governance can frustrate data sharing and re-use.
Meeting climate goals requires transparency and accountability
mechanisms.How do governments, businesses and citizensknow if society is
meeting or exceeding climate change goals? The level of change and complexity
across the built and natural world will require transparent reporting based on data
where the provenance and accuracy can be assured. This will help meet goals,
protect asset value and enable companies to compete based on the quality of
their work.
Addressing the data foundations of the built environment has significant
potential.From helping drive intelligent retrofitstrategies that reduce the
operational carbon footprint of our buildings, to ensuring new infrastructure
projects minimise their embodied carbon, and helping local communities to invest
in measures that reduce their exposure to climate risk – better flows of data can
support innovation, collaboration and transparent measurement of progress.
In the sections that follow we explore a range of opportunities for data to be used
in the built environment to tackle the climate emergency, and, drawing on learning
from other sectors, explore some of the approaches needed to rapidly move
towards realising these.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do7

4. Opportunities for better
data sharing across the
built environment
When it comes to reducing the carbon emissions from the built environment,
there are different elements at play. First, the vast majority of operational
emissions from the built environment are as a result of human behaviour.
Energy use for heating, cooling and powering our homes and offices, use of
transportation, and the intensity with which buildings are used all affect the carbon
emissions linked to each square metre of built space. So better data and the
products and services that can be built upon it can help planners, companies,
consumers and citizens to make better decisions. Yet, those decisions, and their
impacts, are also substantially shaped by the design and quality of new and
existing building stock.
Looking at existing building stock, to target investment in retrofit strategies and
low-carbon upgrades, we need a better understanding of that stock and
infrastructure,including its condition, ownershipand options for improvement. In
the UK, where the vast majority of the housing that will exist in 2030 is already
built, and very little is currently optimised for low-carbon living, data has a central
role to play in shaping national, local and householder strategies to cut climate
impacts.
Transforming our built environment will certainly need a skilled workforce and well
functioning markets to make sure labour is available to deliver improvements.
Better data about the ‘green’ workforce, and a workforce better equipped to use
data, will both be vital to meeting the challenge of climate change. In both new
construction, and in relation to retrofitting strategies, it is vital that gains in
operational efficiency are not undermined by embodied carbon costs of
construction materials, technologies and processes. Approaches to lifecycle
assessment (a method for assessing environmental impacts associated with all
the stages of the lifecycle of a commercial product, process, or service) and
accounting for the full carbon costs of each choice made in built-environment
schemes demand detailed and trustworthy data.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do8

Lastly, investment in a low-carbon transition will require both new finance and
high-quality company and government reporting, increasing transparency and
accountability mechanisms to make sure that global efforts are not derailed.
Trustworthy data will also be vital to support market mechanisms for
decarbonisation, including carbon taxation. The right data can help investors
better understand, prioritise and respond to climate change risks, and avoid
holding stranded assets.
Right now, data supports each of these elements of low carbon transformation,
but we are a long way from harnessing its full potential. No single organisation
holds or controls all the relevant data, or alone has the resources and skills
needed to realise the full benefit data can bring. In the sections below we explore
four themes to understand the potential of data, highlighting current data sharing
initiatives and exploring the challenges that organisations are facing to fully
harness data. We identify some initial opportunities for better sharing and use of
data to address the climate emergency through the built environment.
Operational carbon
With good design, data can help shift the day-to-day decisionsmade by
consumers, commercial firms, policy makers and developers towards
lower-carbon outcomes. From in-home smart meter displays and energy
performance certificates (EPCs), to platforms providing at-scale analysis of the
carbon footprint of large property portfolios,
14
thereare already many established
data-driven tools that encourage action to reduce energy consumption and
operational emissions. However, these tools often rely on relatively limited data
about the existing built environment, and their ability to provide tailored
recommendations is held back by missing data, or barriers to data sharing.
For example, whilst over 20m UK properties now have smart meters and many are
able to see their real-time energy consumption through a device in the home, there
are obstacles to be overcome in providing safe and trusted access to that data for
third-party analysis that might be able to suggest individual strategies for lowering
energy use, or that might support more systemic changes. The ODI has been
working with the Data Communications Company (DCC), who provide the licensed
monopoly platform for smart-meter communications, to explore ways to increase
access to this data, while respecting the significant legitimate privacy concerns
around its use
15
.
15
Data Communications Company (2021),Data for Good
14
For example,Parity Projects
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do9

When it comes to understanding the properties of existing building stock, we
face similar challenges of bringing together data from different stakeholders,
and navigating issues of privacy, commercial interest and the appropriate level of
detail to share. Energy-performance-certificate data, for example, provides basic
information about millions of residential and non-residential properties in the UK,
and it is available through a government provided application programming
interface (API).
16
However, its use raises some practical challenges. Firstly, the data licence
explains that‘address level data concerning the energyperformance of buildings
constitute personal data for the purposes of the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR)’
17
, placing certain restrictionson the kinds of applications to
which the data may be put.
Secondly, the data only covers properties that have been sold since EPC
regulation was introduced in 2007, and as certificates are valid for up to 10 years,
data can be significantly out of date. Thirdly, EPCs are based on only a basic
assessment, and are generated using assumptions that may not reflect the full
condition of a building. However, many other stakeholders may also hold
information about buildings: from insurers and mortgage companies, to local
authorities and construction regulation schemes, maintaining registers of boiler or
window installations. Add to this remote-sensed data and satellite imagery that
might provide additional context about buildings, and the natural environment
surrounding them, and the opportunity for an understanding of buildings based on
multiple data signals, rather than one-off surveys and certificates, becomes clear.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has highlighted the potential of a
growing PropTech (property technology) sector to support revitalised EPCs
18
.
With the right institutional structures in place, it may be possible to develop data
access initiatives that can bring together different building-level datasets, and
unlock new finance for reducing operational carbon. Crowdsourcing can also fill
key data gaps, and engage citizens in thinking about individual and collective
action. For example, as in the case of Colouring London, a citizen science
platform hosted by the Alan Turing Institute designed to gather open data on
London’s building stock. By colouring in the building map, users are able to
provide structured data in categories including building age, construction
methods, and sustainability performance, and participate in making sense of the
opportunities and challenges for transforming the built environment
19
.
19
Colouring London
18
RICS (2020),Retrofitting to Decarbonise the UK ExistingHousing Stock: RICS net-zero position
paper
17
Energy Performance of Buildings Documentation
16
Open Data CommunitiesEnergy Performance of BuildingsData England and Wales
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do10

Case examples: using building data to plan carbonreductions
In 2017, Arup worked with the City of Boston, Massachusetts, US,to
develop a classification of 86,000 buildings into 75 distinct ‘building energy
models’. Calibrating these models with anonymised data from Boston’s utility
providers, the project was able to explore which combination of policies was
most likely to help the city achieve a target of net-zero carbon emissions by
2050
20
. The work fed into wider recommendations thatcalled for a mix of new
regulatory requirements, upfront funding, and workforce training.
In the UK, housing associations and local authorities are responsible for
millions of properties. To work out how to sequenceimprovement plans,
social landlords could potentially draw on data on building age, construction
and condition, current energy demand, future overheating risks, and scope for
improvement, as well as data on the local labour markets and supply chains
that could carry out property updates. Just as for individual homeowners, data
to understand the financial cost of improvements, and the likely costs of doing
nothing, is particularly important, as it shapes forward planning and
cost-benefit calculations. Right now this data is often sparse, hard to access,
and lacks standardisation – leading to a reliance on data intermediaries to
make best-effort calculations.
Much of the data that is needed to plan for more efficient use of building
space comes from outside the built-environment sector: calling for
cross-sector collaboration.For example, to meet operationalcarbon reduction
goals, companies need to make more intensive use of existing space, reducing
overall space heating and power requirements,andreducing work commuting and
travel. This requires action to understand, and shift, current working and travel
behaviours. The Covid-19 pandemic has seen datasets from transport providers,
mobile networks and payment processors used to provide near real-time insight
into how lockdowns transformed the use of urban space, and how it might shape
future infrastructure demands
21
. Qualitative surveysand dialogue with employees,
partners and customers can help firms interpret what aggregate trends mean for
each individual business, and can support planning that makes more efficient use
of existing resources, reducing demands for
new construction.
21
National Infrastructure Commission (2021),Behaviourchange and infrastructure beyond Covid-19
20
Arup (no date),Carbon Free Boston
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do11

Ultimately, the energy demand of homes and offices can only be brought
down far enough through appropriate upgrades, widespread retrofitting of
insulation and low-energy technologies.Data is atthe heart of retrofit planning,
but right now, consumers face a confusing picture when it comes to weighing up
the costs and benefits of different interventions. Without accurate data on upfront
costs and potential benefits, consumer trust can be undermined, and
householders may be less willing to take on retrofit projects. Carbon Coop
in Manchester has been exploring the use of data to drive community-powered
retrofit plans. Its findings highlight the importance of thinking at the community
level, as well as at the household level: combining statistical data with local
knowledge to identify neighbourhoods with the greatest potential for multiple
retrofit projects, and then working at the grassroots to develop cost-effective
retrofit plans
22
. Carbon Coop has also worked withOpen Data Manchester
and the ODI to explore opportunities to create a data cooperative – where people
or organisations agree to pool and share data – to support this work
23
.
For central governments and local authorities, there are also substantial returns to
be had through taking a data-driven approach to policy making. From national
incentive schemes, to local authority regulations, better data has the potential to
help set shared targets, track progress towards goals and inform interventions.
One area where this is particularly important is around workforce development.
Carbon Coop found that‘whilst there isn’t currentlya ready-made ‘Retrofit
Contractor’ workforce, there are quality RMI (Refurbishment, Maintenance and
Improvement) contractors who can apply themselves to a given specification with
the right support”’
24
, yet there is little structureddata available about this primarily
word-of-mouth workforce. A recent Nesta project using its Open Jobs
Observatory to apply machine-learning techniques to explore green jobs through
data shared on key job-seeker websites shows promise in finding ways to gain
more labour market intelligence at scale to inform government policy
25
, while
Carbon Coop is building local software and data infrastructure to better connect
generalist contractors with retrofit opportunities.
25
Nesta (2021),Finding jobs in green industries results
24
Carbon Coop (2019),People Powered Retrofit: A communityled model for owner occupier retrofit -
Project Report
23
Open Data Manchester (2021),Developing a Data CooperativeModel for Small Energy Cooperatives
22
Carbon Coop (2019),People Powered Retrofit: A communityled model for owner occupier retrofit
Project Report
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do12

Embodied carbon
With the right standardisation and flows of data, emissions forecasts for
construction projects could be as commonplace as financial forecasts.
Several platforms and tools already exist to take annotated digital building
information models (BIMs) created during the design and construction process,
and to use the data from these to drive live cycle analysis: giving estimates of the
embodied carbon for each design or material choice. Forecasts of an asset’s
operational carbon emissions, and the risks of issues such as overheating under
future climate-change models, can also be generated by various platforms.
Digital-twin projects go further, creating a dynamically linked digital representation
of built assets that are intended to exist for the whole lifecycle of the structure. In
some cases, these are updated with real-time sensor data, and are able to support
predictive modelling that can be used to optimise buildings for lower carbon.
Wider adoption of such tools has significant potential. One estimate suggests that
if structural engineers alone were to use such tools to reduce the embodied
carbon of buildings by just 10%, there could be around 3m tonnes of carbon
savings each year.
However, a lack of common practice and standardisation – as digital models move
between commissioners, architects, engineers, contractors, installers and builders
– creates a significant barrier to making clear carbon calculations the default.
There is often an information gap between digital twins and the physical
performance of a building. Currently, changes to a design (and the subsequent
impact on operational performance) are not communicated back to designers, and
data is lost.
Current tools to support carbon estimation are often the result of
industry-academia collaboration, but often appear to lack pathways to adoption
beyond the few firms that created them. This creates the risk of many
competing ‘version 1.0 tools’, rather than collaborative investment in common
and open version 2.0 and 3.0 platforms that are both sustainable, and able to
deliver a more joined up user experience across the process from
commissioning to construction.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do13

Case examples:Carbon calculation
In the last few years, a number of new tools have been launched to
streamline carbon calculation.For example: the Institutionof Structural
Engineers ‘Structural Carbon Tool’ is an open-source Microsoft Excel-based
estimator
26
that gives broad estimates of the carbonimpact of different
structural designs. OneClickLCA provides a commercial platform to perform
building and infrastructure LCA, and assess projects against more than 40
different certification schemes
27
. Mott Macdonald’sMoata Carbon Portal
28
offers integration with BIM systems to provide its clients with real-time
calculation of the carbon cost of building models. Arup’s PECC tool
29
provides
similar functionality, layering carbon calculations onto virtual models
The Icebreaker One project is exploring ways to streamline carbon
calculationby rebooting an open dataset of carboncalculation models
30
. The
dataset, previously maintained for several years by startup AMEE, seeks to
provide a unified interface and API onto the different methods available to
calculate embodied, operational or life cycle carbon of particular materials or
construction methods. Just as a financial forecast may provide a range of
possible outcomes based on different assumptions and scenarios, being able
to easily access different methods can help projects to more clearly
communicate to decision makers the range of possible carbon impacts of
each option.
Data & Analytics Facility for National Infrastructure (DAFNI)
31
is an £8m
investment from the UK Collaboratorium for Research on Infrastructure and
Cities (UKCRIC) intended to provide ‘world leading infrastructure systems
research capabilities’. Through provision of data storage, compute,
visualisation and analysis capacity it aims to remove technical barriers that
prevent researchers exchanging and working with complex digital models of
infrastructure and buildings. Pilot work to date has explored how DAFNI can
act as a digital twin platform
32
, and how it can providea technology platform
for the OpenClim Climate Impacts Modelling Framework
33
.
33
Data & Analytics Facility for National Infrastructure (2020),OpenCLIM
32
Data & Analytics Facility for National Infrastructure
DAFNI Champions: DAFNI as a Digital Twin Platform
31
DAFNI: Data & Analytics Facility for National Infrastructure
30
Icebreaker One (nd),Discover
29
RIBA Journal (2020),Carbon calculation tools tocut embodied CO2
28
Mott Macdonald (2021),Moata Carbon Portal
27
One Click LCA: World's fastest Building Life CycleAssessment software
26
The Institution of Structural Engineers (2021),TheStructural Carbon Tool
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do14

Data can guide decisions over the projects that should receive funding,
subsidy or prioritisation as we work towards ambitious carbon reduction
targets.The UK’s Infrastructure and Projects Authority(IPA) forecast that more
than £650bn will be spent over the next decade on new infrastructure, from roads
and rail schemes, to new schools, flood management schemes and broadband
networks
34
. However, with the construction phase accountingfor up to 40% of the
lifetime emissions of an infrastructure project, reducing the carbon cost of this
investment over the next 10 years has a key role to play in meeting 2030 targets.
Both local and national public works pipelines are frequently based on static
cost-benefit analysis calculations that have not been updated to reflect both
changing patterns of demand, and the increasing urgency of carbon reduction. A
move from document-driven processes, to planning and decision-making based
on data-driven and standardised digital models, accompanied by appropriate
training for decision makers, has the potential to transform the choices made over
what to build, how, and when.
Earlier this year, the UK Net Zero Infrastructure Industry Coalition published a
report drawing on data from the IPA’s National Infrastructure and Construction
Pipeline dataset to try and calculate the locked-in embodied carbon that will result
from proposed infrastructure projects
35
. While thiswork offers a powerful
demonstration of how data could be used to set the direction of public investment,
the analysis was frustrated by‘significant issueswith data availability, quality, and
transparency across sectors that needs remedying from both top-down and
bottom-up’. In particular, the project team foundit hard to locate data stewards in
construction organisations who could supply access to the key datasets that
might offer insight into the likely carbon footprint of projects.
Effective data stewardship is also a key issue for the reference datasets used
in greenhouse gas accounting and lifecycle analysis (LCA). At present, the
landscape of reference datasets and models for carbon calculation can be
complex and confusing: leading to variation between different embodied carbon
estimates. There is also an interplay between regulation or legislation, and carbon
estimation datasets, with different national or sectoral requirements leading to use
of different datasets. Greater policy harmonisation could help simplify the data
landscape.
Maintaining these reference datasets takes considerable effort: requiring ongoing
research into the carbon emissions of materials, keeping track of changing global
supply chains, and converting research outputs into reusable calculations. This
results in a mixed marketplace of government or academic provided datasets, and
commercial offerings, but few that are maintained as robust or collaborative
36
open data infrastructures with built-in version control, APIs and supporting
36
ODI (2020),Launching the collaborative data maintenanceguidebook
35
Net Zero Infrastructure Industry Coalition (2021),
Is our carbon wallet empty? The embodied carbon of the National Infrastructure Pipeline
34
UK government (2021),Analysis of the National Infrastructureand Construction Pipeline 2021
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do15

software toolkits. For example, the widely used Inventory of Carbon and Energy
(ICE) database
37
is provided as an Microsoft Exceldownload, under a permissive,
but non-open licence. Modernising the management of greenhouse gas
accounting and LCA datasets through creation of the right data institutions to
steward data holds out the possibility of substantially increasing the usability and
use of this vital data. This could foster a shift towards more open business models
for carbon accounting services across the market, and challenge data-hoarding
practices that can hold back progress towards shared goals.
Transparency
Trustworthy greenhouse gas accounting is central to improved corporate
sustainability reporting, and to the effective functioningof financial markets to
direct built environment activities towards carbon reduction. Companies face an
increasing number of mandatory and voluntary reporting standards that ask for
accounting of direct emissions of greenhouse gases (‘scope 1’), indirect emissions
from the generation of purchased energy (‘scope 2’) and emissions generated
within their value chain, both upstream and downstream (‘scope 3’)
38
, alongside
wider reporting on biodiversity, social and governance issues. An increasing
number of investors are drawing on company-reported sustainability data to
shape their portfolios towards low-carbon futures, and because of concerns about
the impact of both climate change, and potential regulatory changes, in creating
‘stranded assets’. A stranded asset is something that once had value or produced
income but no longer does, often due to some kind of external change.
Greenhouse gas accounting data will also be a vital component of any future
carbon tax regimes.
Well designed reporting standards, that are informed by consideration of the data
infrastructure through which reporting will be generated, can incentivise the
creation of robust data systems inside firms, that not only serve external reporting,
but that also support in-house analysis and decision making. However, a
proliferation of reporting standards, and a limited focus on data-infrastructure
design, can create barriers to effective reporting and benchmarking: This can
undermine the quality of reported data and even incentivise ‘greenwashing’. At
present, considerable effort goes into simply extracting data from reports. If that
effort could be instead harnessed to verify, audit and quality assure data, the
impact of the corporate sustainability data ecosystem could be increased.
38
ODI (2021),Accelerating progress on tackling theclimate crisis through data collaboration
37
Circular Ecology (2021),Embodied Carbon FootprintDatabase
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do16

Case examples:supporting reporting transparency
Bloomberg
39
, Refinitiv
40
and other financial-marketinformation providers offer
products based on standardising the data from company environmental,
social and governance reports. Limited data standardisation at source creates
the need for intermediaries to analyse published reports, and raises the costs
of access to this data.
Arup’s Beacon platform draws on companies' financial information to
calculate Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions across a whole supply chain, identifying
areas to reduce both operational and embodied carbon emissions, and
supporting greenhouse gas reporting
41
.
The Open Footprint Forum
42
, hosted by the Open Groupand co-chaired by
leaders from ERM and Shell, is working to develop‘a common model for
footprint-related data covering all types of emissions, consumptions (e.g.,
water, land, energy), and base calculations to normalize and aggregate data’
implemented through an open-source based reference software stack.
Circular Ecology list a range of greenhouse gas emission calculation tools
designed specifically developed for the buildings sector
43
, though notes that
not all are easily or openly accessible.
43
Circular Ecology (2021),Carbon footprint calculatorsfor construction
42
Open Group (no date),Open Footprint Forum
41
Arup (no date),Beacon: a new methodology
40
Refinitv (2021),ESG data
39
Bloomberg (2021),ESG Data
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do17

Transparent reporting should not just be about compliance, but should
recognise the potential of shared data for benchmarking and sector-wide
learning.For example, shared and structured reportingon project-level data, as
opposed to company level, can support identification of data-backed targets for
new building projects, informing both contractors and commissioners. Data from
certification schemes, and voluntary data contributed to projects such as the
Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors nascent Building Carbon Database
44
can
help practitioners to compare the performance of a planned project portfolio with
that achieved by peers, supporting conversations about ways to further optimise
designs.
Data is already enabling a move to project and asset level reporting.Initiatives
such as the Spatial Finance Initiatives GeoAsset project
45
are generating open
datasets with information about built assets, their locations, and ownership in
order to support both financial markets, policymakers and non-governmental
organisations drive a shift towards greater sustainability. The first GeoAsset
dataset covers cement, iron and steel production plants, drawing on multiple data
sources, remote sensing and machine learning in order to exceed the
approximately 70% coverage that proprietary asset databases tend to reach.
Global asset-level reporting is able to leverage the considerable progress made in
recent years on data infrastructure to provide unique identifiers for companies,
and to link this to corporate structure information (see below). Bringing greater
transparency to the ownership, location and condition of existing assets is also
critical to preparing for climate shocks, and planning for climate adaptation.
Resilience
Even with action to reduce emissions, the built environment will have to
adapt to a changing climate. Data is vital to understand and increase the
resilience of buildings and infrastructure.For example,the Climate Just
mapping tool draws upon multiple public datasets to provide localised
assessments of populations vulnerable to flooding, household overheating, or fuel
poverty, as climate change impacts hit
46
. Work by UniversityCollege London used
the tool to explore overheating risk in care homes, mapping care home locations
and exploring the interaction of urban heat islands, population age and building
characteristics
47
. Data-driven research such as thiscan inform short and long-term
campaigning and planning to avoid climate harms disproportionately affecting the
most vulnerable.
47
Climate London (2018),Mapping heat vulnerabilityin London
46
Climate Just (no date),Mapping tool page
45
Spatial Finance Initiative (no date),GeoAsset Project- Greening Finance and Investment
44
RICS (2019),RICS Building Carbon Database
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do18

Case examples: open data for resilience
Since 2011 the Open Data for Resilience Initiative, run by the Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery,  has been encouraging
greater data sharing, collection and use for resilience and disaster
response, with an emphasis on geospatial data. Theproject field guide
explores how to bring together multiple stakeholders from governments,
universities, civil society and private sector organisations to collaborate in
building an open data ecosystem. As the guide describes‘OpenDRI catalyzes
a change to mindset: it builds a community of practitioners who apply open
data to their daily problems, and in so doing, creates a sustainable ecosystem
around a living and growing corpus of data that describe a dynamic society’
48
.
Insurers have a key role to play in pushing for resilience of the built
environment: with the potential to mobilise billions of dollars of
preemptive finance for risk reduction.In 2019, workbegan on a set of open
data standards for describing insured assets, such as buildings and
infrastructure
49
, and modelled loss reports used insetting premium. This has
the potential to both support adoption of open risk models, and greater
portability of data between insurer systems and other parties.
One pathway towards more resilient buildings involves the introduction of
smart systems, able to respond to greater pressure on energy grids through
adapting demand and supply of power.The adoptionof open standards for data
communication within smart buildings, whether closed, shared or open, is vital to
avoid vendor lock-in, maximise the value of the data generated, and ensure smart
features remain interoperable as technology develops. US-based Project
Haystack, which seeks to‘standardize semantic datamodels and web services
with the goal of making it easier to unlock value from the vast quantity of data
being generated by the smart devices that permeate our homes, buildings,
factories, and cities’responds to this challengeby providing a set of agreed
taxonomies that can be used to provide compatible datasets and API endpoints
for building systems such as lighting, heating and air conditioning
50
.
As the smart-building case shows, making effective use of data to address
climate change in the built environment isn’t all about creating vast central
datasets, or using the latest smart technology. Small,standardised and
decentralised data can help put individuals and communities in control of charting
a low-carbon future, enabling the combination of local skills and knowledge with
data-derived insight.
50
Project Haystack
49
Oasis Loss Modelling Framework (no date),Open DataStandards
48
Open DRI (2014),Open Data for Resilience Initiative:Field Guide
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do19

5. Approaches for creating
open and trustworthy
data ecosystems
The Open Data Institute theory of change
The ODI wants those who steward data and those who create information from
this data to act in ways that lead to the best social and economic outcomes for
everyone.
There are three activities that create impact from data: stewarding data under
which we mean collecting, maintaining and sharing data; creating information
from that data in the form of products and services, analyses and insights, or
stories and visualisations; and deciding what to do informed by information
from multiple sources along with experience and understanding .
Each of these activities can be carried out by individuals, companies,
communities or governments.
The ODI’s theory of change identifies the threats that can stop positive impact
from data. One threat is a data-hoarding approach, where misconceptions
about the value of data leads to monopolies, reduced innovation and invasion
of privacy. Another is a data fearing approach, leading to missing, inaccurate
and non-representative data, potentially because data subjects give false
details, or withdraw consent for data use.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do20

To combat these threats, we need to build openness and trustworthiness into
each data ecosystem, which will help us to realise the greatest social and
economic value from data for everyone.
More specifically, this means applying an open culture to the three pillars of
how data is used in our economies: a data infrastructure that is as open as
possible; data literacy and capability for all; and open innovation. Equally, it
means putting in place practices that ensure the way data is collected and
used is trustworthy and just, including building ethical considerations into data
collection, management and use; ensuring there is equity around who
accesses, uses and benefits from data; and engaging widely with affected
people and organisations.
The Exponential Roadmap, a call to action setting out 36 solutions with the
potential to halve emissions by 2030, argues that‘digital services have potential,
tenfold their footprint, to reduce energy and materials across the economy and
could directly enable a third of the emissions reductions needed by 2030.’
51
Yet, to
harness that potential demands substantial actions that can move us from a world
still largely defined by data silos, disjointed data access, and missed opportunities
for data use – to one with a vibrant and trusted data ecosystem for the built
environment.
A vibrant data ecosystem involves a constellation ofdata infrastructure, data
literacy and open innovation. Data infrastructureencompasses crucial data
assets, standards, technologies, guidance and policies. Data infrastructure is
supported by organisations that govern the data infrastructure, includingdata
institutions or data access initiativesthat bringtogether multiple stakeholders
to solve a common social, environmental or economic challenge. These
components are all necessary to enable diverse independent stakeholdersto
operate and interact within a culture of open and shared data.
In this section we explore learning from other sectors and domains, to highlight
elements of the way forward. For each example, we have sought to draw out some
of the key features that may provide inspiration to action on climate change in the
built-environment sector.
51
Falk, J. and Gaffney, O. (2020)Exponential Roadmap:Scaling 36 Solutions to Halve Emissions by
2030 (Version 1.5.1).
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do21

Data infrastructure
Data infrastructureconsists of data assets supportedby people, processes and
technology
52
. The data assets at the heart of any giveninfrastructure vary:
technical schemas for data exchange; metadata registries for locating relevant
data; data lakes and processing environments designed for specialised datasets;
and core reference data and identifier lists provided via APIs and downloads to
improve interoperability.
Developing infrastructure in the open
The ODI has articulated seven design principles for data infrastructure: design for
openness; build with the web; respect privacy; benefit everyone; think big but start
small; design to adapt; and encourage open innovation
53
.
Since 2013, theOpen Contracting Partnershiphas beenworking to develop a
global data infrastructure to enable transparent and effective public procurement,
and supporting its adaptation and adoption in different sectoral and country
contexts. At the heart of the open contracting data infrastructure is theOpen
Contracting Data Standard (OCDS), a data specificationthat describes how to
represent each stage of public procurement processes as structured data. Prior to
the introduction of the standard, it was often hard to join up the data on what
governments planned to buy, what they tendered for, the contract awards made,
and final delivery of goods, services or works. Building on a design process that
considered private sector, public sector and civil society use cases for
procurement data, OCDS introduced the idea of a common identifier to tie
together stages of procurement, and set out key fields of data that existing
systems should map to. The first proof-of-concept prototype was built in just 10
days, followed by a year-long series of development sprints commissioned by the
World Bank, each one delivering an iteration on a prototype for comment and
feedback.
53
ODI (2016),Principles for strengthening our datainfrastructure
52
ODI (no date),Data infrastructure
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do22

Figure N: What can be covered by data standards?
Source: http://standards.theodi.org/introduction/
As a result of this open and iterative development process, before OCDS was
even finished, the data structures it provides were forming the basis for Ukraine’s
new ProZorro born-digital procurement data infrastructure. This is estimated to
have saved upwards of $1.9bn against budgeted spend
54
through better
purchasing and reduced fraud and corruption (a significant return on investment
given the estimated €4.7m cost of establishing the ProZorro system
55
). Now
around $363bn of annual public contracting is described in standardised data
56
.
Open Contracting Partnership (OCP) research found that several countries that
had used OCDS to shape their procurement data infrastructure were able to
respond more readily to the pressures of emergency Covid-19 procurement, using
transparency as a tool for intelligent purchasing, rather than seeing it as a
bureaucratic hurdle
57
.
From the start, OCDS was designed with flexibility in mind: seeking to make data
interoperable enough to support re-use of analytical tools across countries and
contexts, but also recognising the different priorities, risks and opportunities
around public procurement that exist in each country. A key part of the OCP’s role
as steward of OCDS is to engage with the community of users, and spot
57
Open Contracting Partnership,Global procurementresponses to COVID-19: how to do better in an
emergency
56
Open Contracting Partnership (2020),Global ProcurementSpend
55
Results for Development (2017),Costing the ProZorroe-Procurement Program
54
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Observatory of Public Sector Innovation
(2016),eProcurement system ProZorro
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do23

opportunities for extending or updating the standard so it continues to support
learning, collaboration and innovation.
Technical data standards to enable the built-environment sector to respond to
the climate crisis stand to have greater impact if developed through open,
agile approaches – learning from models like OCDS that bring together policy
and technology.
Creating appropriate infrastructure
Effective standards and infrastructures are built with a clear understanding of the
daily experience of the community that will be using them.
The Flexible, Appropriate, Structured, Transparent (FAST) Standard
58
provides a
set of rules on the structure and design of spreadsheet based models, particularly
for the financial sector. Managed and maintained under an open licence by a UK
non-profit organisation, the standard is focused on creating models that are‘as
simple as possible, but no simpler’by setting outrules for workbook organisation,
sheet layout, and formula design.
Rather than encouraging creators and consumers of financial models to move to
new tools and platforms, the FAST Standard sets out to ‘tweak’ existing Microsoft
Excel use practices, with the goal of reducing complexity in how data is expressed
(even if there is considerable complexity to the underlying model).
Recognising the widespread use of spreadsheets for data exchange in built
environment projects, standards like FAST may provide inspiration for ways to
strengthen good data-management culture and practice, and to increase the
usability of spreadsheet-based modelling tools.
Data institutions
Data institutionsare organisations whose purposeinvolves stewarding data on
behalf of others, often for public good. Well designed data institutions can provide
trustworthy data governance, aligning the different stakeholders’ incentives and
solving collective action problems that would otherwise lead to an
underinvestment in data, limited data sharing, or unsustainable data supply.
In recent years, significant work has gone into exploring the range of institutional
models for data stewardship, from trusts with fiduciary responsibility to protect
personal data; to co-operatives that seek to work to ensure benefits are shared
between all those who contribute data; to commons, created through use of
appropriate data licensing. Whether it's a small reference dataset, or a large global
data infrastructure, often more than the technical infrastructure is required to
provide the foundation for collaboration and innovation at scale.
58
The FAST Standard Organisation
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do24

Connecting governance, regulation and technology
Data institution design involves work to align governance, sustainable funding and
technical architectures.
TheGlobal Legal Entity Identifier (LEI)
59
was createdin the wake of the 2007/8
financial crisis, following recognition of the systemic risks created through patchy
data on the market participants actually involved in trades, derivatives and other
financial products. Prior to the LEI, financial data systems either had to
accommodate hundreds of different local company identifiers, or to make use of
proprietary ‘black box’ company identification products. The LEI is an identifier
that firms and other market participants register through a Local Operating Unit
(LOU), licensed to issue identifiers in a given jurisdiction or sector by the Global
LEI Foundation’s (GLIEF). The GLEIF itself is governed by a Regulatory Oversight
Committee and operates under globally set principles and a charter. Over time,
standards for structured data attached to each Legal Entity Identifier have been
developed by GLEIF, allowing the central infrastructure to aggregate and provide
API access to the details and corporate structure of over 1.8m financial sector
firms and actors.
Figure N: the Global LEI System as a Legal Network(Source:GLEIF.org)
Early advocacy during the set-up of GLEIF ensured that the LEI system is
committed to open data principles for data access, while it has also developed a
model of registration fees, creating financial sustainability for the system. A 2018
review notes the substantial progress made by the system, and its potential, but
cautions that it will take continued work from regulators and senior management
59
Global Legal Entity Identifier Foundation
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do25

for the LEI to becomethestandard identifier in financial markets, displacing legacy
data practices
60
.
Global challenges for built environment firms around common carbon
measurement and reporting may call for substantial work on designing
governance institutions, and securing regulatory change, to align different
stakeholders around common data standards and data sharing processes.
From scraped datasets to trusted open infrastructures
There are cases where existing data projects have migrated into more formal data
institution structures over time, in order to maximise their contribution to the
public good.
Before the intergovernmental efforts to develop the LEI had even begun, many
people were already grappling with the challenge of how to bring together data
about companies, and to understand and map supply and value chains.
OpenCorporateswas first launched in 2010 as an opendatabase of information
scraped from company registers, hosted by a small independent company
61
.
As the platform has grown, it has become a critical resource for journalists, NGOs
and researchers who are often unable to afford alternative black-box commercial
data products. In 2018, ownership of OpenCorporates was transferred into a
Trust
62
, allowing the platform to continue to generatecommercial income, but
locking in a public-benefit business model that allows others to build on the
platform without fearing that access to the data for public good uses could be
removed in future
63
.
There are numerous (and important) elements in the data ecosystem that
support climate action around the built environment that lack stable
institutional foundations. Identifying ways to improve the sustainability, support
for, and guaranteed open licensing of key datasets could unlock significant
new activity.
63
Open Corporates (no date),Governance
62
Open Corporates (2018),Announcing the OpenCorporatesTrust
61
State of Open Data (2019),Corporate Ownership
60
Journal of Risk and Financial Management (2019),The Global Legal Entity Identifier System: How
Can It Deliver?
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do26

Data access and use initiatives
Many thriving data infrastructures and institutions are embodied within, or provide
the foundations for, widerdata access and use initiatives.These initiatives seek
to catalyse action around specific social, environmental or economic problems,
and bring together multiple stakeholders in order to address the particular data
collection, sharing and use parts of the problem space
64
.Initiatives take many
forms, from ad-hoc coalitions, to long-term programmes with high-level policy
backing.
Improving data discovery
Icebreaker One was launched in 2019 as a non-profit organisation with a vision to
‘empower decision-makers to mandate, measure and act upon the data-flows that
enable net-zero’. Through scoping research, rapid prototyping and convening
stakeholders, the project quickly identified a need to address data sharing in the
energy sector.
Thousands of different entities are involved in the energy generation and
distribution market in the UK: from generators and distributors, to regulators,
suppliers, service providers and consultancies. Many of these actors generate,
hold or need access to data. Better data sharing could accelerate a low-carbon
energy transition, but, as the Icebreaker One Open Energy initiative
65
identified, it’s
often difficult to discover when data is available, and once discovered, to work out
the terms on which it might be accessed. As a result, the Open Energy initiative
has worked with the energy industry and other stakeholders to develop a
federated data search, backed up with clear metadata standards that support
‘preemptive licensing’. This gives data holders a structured language within which
to express that, for example, they are willing for a particular dataset to be directly
accessed and freely used by academics or public sector users, whereas
commercial users should get in touch to arrange charged access, supporting
sustainable cost recovery for data maintenance.
The technical specification at the heart of Open Energy is not, however, just a tool
for metadata exchange: it also supports conversations with energy sector
stakeholders about how they can improve their data stewardship. To see data
included in the catalogue, organisations need to think about the data they hold,
have conversations about the terms under which it can be shared, and consider
the data from others they may potentially draw upon. By creating a meeting place
and marketplace, the project surfaces data demand, and highlights gaps where
further data institution building may be needed to improve the flow of data. The
Open Energy project has also been exploring the incentives that different
stakeholders need in order to participate: ranging from recognition to regulatory
mandates.
65
http://energy.icebreakerone.org
64
ODI (2020),What do we mean by data access initiatives?
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do27

There is a wealth of built environment data that could be harnessed to tackle
climate change if it were more discoverable. Declaring the data assets that are
available, and exploring the terms under which they could be more widely
shared, can be a powerful early step in surfacing the value of data, and
catalysing greater focus on data stewardship.
Fostering innovation and cooperation
Climate Subak gets its name from a ninth century cooperative irrigation system
used in Indonesian rice fields that‘allowed for thesharing of critical resources
(water) to ensure the survival and growth of the community.’
66
.Recognising data as
a 21st century critical resource that is vital to ensure survival and growth in the
face of climate change, Subak has created a technology accelerator programme,
aiming to stimulate data use that both engages with, and feeds back into, a rich
climate data infrastructure.
As well as providing funding and support to data-driven climate-focused
non-profit organisations to enable them develop and scale ideas that drive faster
and better climate action, Subak asks each organisation they work with to commit
to adata pledge.The pledge seeks to create a datacooperative ecosystem, in
which all the data gathered by accelerator members (and other voluntary
signatories) becomes available to other climate-focused projects. It includes
commitments to take responsibility for data quality, standardisation and
interoperability. It also places emphasis on data accessibility, recognising that
attention is needed to curating complex climate data so that each datasets is
constructed‘with a user experience, in which interestedpeople irrespective of skill
set would be able to understand its relevance.” ’
67
Built environment stakeholders should explore how to incentivise small- and
large-scale innovation with data, while also building collaborative and
commons based solutions. They should not put effort into competing
initiatives that seek to hoard rather than share data.
67
Subak (no date),The Data Cooperative
66
Subak (no date),About Us
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do28

Data cultures: independent actions in a
vibrant ecosystem
While infrastructure, institutions and initiatives provide the groundwork to realise
value from data, it is action from many different individual entrepreneurs, firms,
nonprofits and forward-thinking government agencies that leads to the growth of
thriving data ecosystems. This requires people with the capacity and interest to
engage in collaborative data projects, and community-building efforts that join the
dots between different stakeholders.
The journey towards data culture
Over the last 20 years, the international development field has progressively
embraced data as a powerful tool for planning, prioritising and monitoring activity,
and has developed a widespread culture of open data and data use. It has
invested in capacity building in large institutions and grassroots organisations.
Driven initially by a transparency agenda, the international development landscape
now hosts a wide range of actors producing data standards, providing data
sharing platforms, advocating for improved data quality, and investing in support
for open data activity.
68
One community-building nodein this ecosystem is The
Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data which provides a network
bringing together hundreds of organisations – from national statistical agencies, to
two-person startups – to support peer learning and knowledge exchange
69
.
National, regional and global fora also provide a space to showcase projects, to
secure ongoing high-level support for data programmes, and to deepen networks
between individual practitioners.
For built environment firms and individuals used to solving their data problems
alone, or with black-box off-the-shelf products, moving to a world in which
they have the ability to draw on data as a shared or common resource for
problem solving can involve considerable culture change, not to mention
calling for new skills and working practices. Accelerating this culture change
will take dedicated focus.
It is also worth noting that there can be significant differences between the
professional cultures of civil engineering and software engineering, or between
the forms of dialogue and action of climate activists and construction
specialists. Building deeper open and shared data cultures to respond to the
climate emergency will require two-way dialogue between data specialists, and
built-environment experts, understanding the knowledge, experience and
insights that each brings.
69
Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data
68
Zenodo (2019),Open Data Sectors and Communities:Development Assistance and Humanitarian
Action
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do29

6. Summary and call
to action
The need for urgent action on climate change is no longer a matter of debate. Nor
are we short of viable changes that can be made that would substantially reduce
short- and long-term energy demand. The question now for the built-environment
sector is how to accelerate action to reduce emissions, build for resilience and
protect biodiversity. We need to use all the tools at our disposal, including the
significant power of data.
Meeting this challenge calls for coordination, cooperation, community-building
and culture change across the built-environment sector, and for cross-sector
collaboration to break down data silos. When stakeholders come together to
identify shared challenges, ambitious goals, and clear plans, they can mobilise
resources to deliver rapid change at scale.
In this report we’ve surveyed a number of particular challenges, including
bringing together data on the existing built environment to support strategic
action and investment, and unlocking greater building and house-level data to
support individual choices around energy saving and retrofit planning. We have
identified the need to improve standards and working practices so that digital
representations of projects during the planning stage can be better used to drive
low-carbon design. We have highlighted challenges relating to reliable and
trustworthy carbon calculation, and pointed to the potential for modern data
stewardship practices to address some of these. And we’ve looked at the
importance of bringing in data from other settings and sectors, working across
professional and organisational boundaries.
Some of the challenges are technical, some are political, and others are around
culture and capacity.
None can be solved by organisations acting alone.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do30

We are calling on data creators, data stewards, researchers, data users, and
those whose actions could be shaped by better access, sharing and use of
built environment-related data, to join us to chart a shared route map for
2022 and beyond.
This paper launches a call for collaboration – we are asking organisations and
individuals to take action and:
-Give us your feedback on this working paperto helpfocus future data
collaborations and activities by filling thisformbetween now and 19th of
November
-Sign up to collaborate with us –making 2022 a yearof action on
built-environment data to tackle the climate crisis.
-Tell us about existing data-sharing and open data projects, priorities and
needsto help build a shared map of initiatives andopportunities.
-Commit to identifying how you can play a role in improving data flows in
support of the priority areas in the built-environment sector, building a
deeper culture of data sharing to address climate challenges.
November 2021 | Tackling the climate crisis with data: what the built-environment sector can do31