

1

Contents
About2
Background3
The importance of secondary use of health data in the European region4
The 2021 European Health Data Space consultation6
EU policy on secondary use of health data7
Relevant EU-wide policy7
Overview of current strategic direction10
Analysis of key aspects of EU policies and implementation12
Forward look15
About
This white paper was commissioned by Roche and researched and produced by
the Open Data Institute and published in July 2021. The lead author is Mark Boyd,
and the wider project team includes Mahad Alassow, Milly Zimeta, and Jeni
Tennison.
If you want to share feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact us at
policy@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data2

Background
"Despite progress in recent years, high-quality data are not routinely collected in
all settings, major health challenges are not adequately monitored, and effective
interventions are not directed to the right people, at the right time and at the right
place. This impacts policies and programmes and consequently, the health of
entire populations. Similarly, in order to meet the shared SDG commitment to
“leave no-one behind”, we need disaggregated data to ensure equitable health
outcomes. This means we must strengthen comprehensive data systems,
collaborate with other sectors, and apply innovative digital technologies to collect,
analyse and use data to make informed decisions and deliver impact."
-Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General
1
The global Covid-19 pandemic has altered many of our societal and economic
systems. Health data infrastructure has played a key role in enabling research to
be shared, for disease and variant spread to be tracked and monitored, for
cross-border care to be managed, and for cross-sector collaboration to be
encouraged. However, the pandemic also revealed multiple gaps and barriers that
prevented the free flow of data in a manner that is ethical, equitable and respects
individual privacy. Concerns with privacy in Covid-19 app contact tracking, the
inability for systems to analyse and share data on subpopulations facing greatest
inequalities, interoperability barriers in sharing patient data across national
borders, and the limited pooling of research data to understand potential
treatment options were all evident across 2020.
2
But even before the pandemic, there was an urgent need to optimise healthcare
systems and manage limited healthcare resources more effectively to meet the
needs of growing, and often ageing, populations. Global and European-wide
priorities to reduce inequalities require new action strategies. Technological
advances enabling the use of large datasets coupled with artificial intelligence and
machine learning algorithms to assess new therapeutic interventions to be tested
and developed at pace need to be matched with ethical review and
reimbursement and investment policies. There is also confusion in requirements
for data localisation and storage, and impacts of procurement and contract
arrangements with technology providers on data privacy and capacity to share
data across borders.
Now, coupled with the urgency of the pandemic, there is a heightened need to
resolve how health systems will govern and steward health data to develop early
diagnostic and health surveillance systems. This need is being matched by
accelerated willingness to adopt digital healthcare solutions, and greater societal
interest in understanding and ensuring personal data is managed responsibly and
ethically.
2
Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, "State of democracy, human rights and the rule of law",
https://rm.coe.int/annual-report-sg-2021/1680a264a2and the human rights and COVID-19 website of the
Council of Europe: https://www.coe.int/en/web/portal/covid-19
1
WHO (2021), "Global report on health data systemsand capacity, 2020",
https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/world-health-data-platform/score/who_2021-01-31_global-
report-score_tb_v2.pdf
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data3

The importance of secondary use of health data
in the European region
Secondary use of health data plays a central role in enabling all of these potential
future trajectories. The Open Data Institute (ODI) has been commissioned by
Roche to undertake a policy research project analysing the emerging secondary
use of health data in the policy environment. This project seeks to identify
opportunities that strengthen the European health data ecosystem. The project
focuses on how secondary uses of health data can be enabled, while respecting
individual health data privacy, and a final report and associated tools are expected
to be published around September/October 2021.
This project defines the secondary use of health data as:
‘The use of aggregated health data from population-level sources
including electronic health records, wearables technologies, health
insurance claims data, health registry data (or burden of disease
registries), drug consumption data, and data collected through
research to improve personal care planning, medicines development,
safety monitoring, research and policymaking.’
Enabling secondary use of health data is a cornerstone of a health data
ecosystem, and it requires a policy and implementation environment that protects
personal data while enabling research and innovation.
Secondary use of health data enables a wide range of use cases and benefits
across the entire healthcare system, as described in Table 1, below.
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data4

Table 1: Key potential use cases from secondary use of health data
and the benefits they enable
Use casesOptimise health systemsImprove the patient
journey
Encourage
patient–public
participation
Expand innovation
Key
benefits
enabled
●
Reduce healthcare
costs
3
●
Increase planning and
more efficient resource
allocation
●
Allow equity-focused
prioritisation
4
●
Modernise
reimbursement and
pricing models
5
●
Enable insights for
population health
management, early
diagnosis, prevention
and healthy living
6
●
Early, personalised
and advanced
diagnostics
●
Personalised care
pathways and
clinical decision
support systems
●
Rapid access to
personalised
interventions
●
Remote monitoring
and care via digital
health apps and
tools
●
Allow patient
contribution of
personal data
●
Leverage real-world
data for health
conversations
●
Enhance
preventative care
●
Enable self
management of
chronic illness
●
Enable new research
●
Expand innovative
medicine and
technology
development
7
●
Facilitate predictive
modeling
●
Reduce research
risks
●
Allow new market
entrants and
encourage startups
to work
collaboratively with
existing stakeholders
●
Strengthen
assessment of
health technologies
Health data is often considered for secondary uses in medical research. This use
case is expected to grow significantly with the use of artificial intelligence:
datasets collected from electronic health records or from other clinical trials and
research could be used to train machine learning algorithms when assessing
potential effectiveness of new therapies, for example. This requires new ethical
models of risk assessment. But health data is alsoused for other secondary
8
purposes, including to optimise health resource allocation and expenditure.
An emerging use case is the secondary use of health data to support personalised
healthcare along the entire patient journey. Whileelectronic healthcare data can
9
be used to improve healthcare decision-making for a patient (for example, by
reducing risks of pharmaceutical contraindications when a patient has multiple
prescribing healthcare professionals), an emerging use case for secondary use of
health data is when an individual patient's healthcare data is compared with
aggregated data from others with similar profiles. Drawing on this dataset enables
precision medicine to emerge: healthcare professionals can create more
personalised care pathways and speed up personalised intervention decisions.
9
Bignens, et al (2020), 'Consensus Paper on the BuildingBlocks for Personalised Healthcare',
https://futureproofinghealthcare.com/sites/default/files/inline-files/PHC%20building%20blocks_Consensus
%20paper_FINAL.pdf
8
Jungkunz et al (2021), 'Secondary Use of ClinicalData in Data-Gathering, Non-Interventional Research or
Learning Activities: Definition, Types, and a Framework for Risk Assessment',
https://www.jmir.org/2021/6/e26631
7
European Medicines Agency (2020), ‘GDPR and the secondaryuse of health data’
6
Journal of Law and the Biosciences (2020),’The useof data from electronic health records in times of a
pandemic—a legal and ethical assessment’
5
BMC (2020), ‘A systematic literature review of healthconsumer attitudes towards secondary use and
sharing of health administrative and clinical trial data: a focus on privacy, trust, and transparency’,
4
The Lancet Digital Health (2021), ‘Health data poverty:an assailable barrier to equitable digital health care’,
3
HIMSS, D’Amore, Mitchell (2020), ‘Electronic HealthRecord Data Governance and Data Quality in the Real World’
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data5

The 2021 European Health Data Space
consultation
The creation of a European Health Data Space (EHDS) is one the key priorities of
the European Commission in the area of health. It is one of the first initiatives to
extend the work outlined in the European Strategy for Data. The purpose of the
10
EHDS is to promote health-data exchange and support research on new
preventive strategies, as well as on treatments, medicines, medical devices and
outcomes.
This white paper shares some of our initial analysis on the overall European health
policy environment and is intended to support stakeholders understand current
issues in enabling secondary use of health data in advance of theEuropean
Health Data Space consultation, which currently endson 26 July 2021.
This public consultation focuses on:
●
the access to and use of health data for healthcare provision, research
and innovation, policy-making and regulatory decision;
●
fostering a genuine single market for digital health services and products,
including innovative ones.
11
This will be an opportunity for stakeholders to share their perspectives on what
key data governance components should be addressed by the European Health
Data Space in order to ensure health data creates benefits for everyone, while
protecting privacy.
The ODI's recent work on health data policy may also be useful to review when
considering responses to the European Health Data Space consultation.
This work includes:
●
HowCovid-19 symptom tracker appscan collate health-surveillance
data for early diagnostics, without exposing personal health data.
●
The roledata intermediariescan play to protect theprivacy of health
data while also making anonymised, aggregated health data available
for scientific research.
●
The opportunity of secondary use of health data toopen new markets
in physical activity businesses, which in turn generategreater
preventative health opportunities for local populations.
●
How competitive industry stakeholders are able to collaborate and
share clinical trial data on global health challengessuch as antimicrobial
resistance, while still protecting their commercialadvantage.
●
Summary of the global data governance environment, including current
debates on health data as a global public good, and current maturity of
fata governance globally and emerging best practices, created as
pre-reads for the WHO Data Governance Summit, heldon 30 June
2021.
11
Description of EHDS and the goals of the public consultation were taken from the background paper for
the public consultation:
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/api/files/document/print/en/ip_21_2083/IP_21_2083_EN.pdf
10
European Commission (2020), European Strategy for Data,
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data6

EU policy on secondary use
of health data
Overall, Europe presents an exciting policy base for the creation of secondary
use of health data.In the last two years, in linewith the European Strategy for Data
, a health data policy environment conducive to enablingsecondary use cases has
12
started to emerge. Policies and strategies increasingly take a joined-up approach.
Our research has identified that four biggest challenges remain:
●
Differing interpretations of GDPR and lack of legislative clarity on how to
enable secondary use of health data while maintaining Europe’s strong
foundation of data privacy
●
Fragmentation in initiatives and approaches across Europe negatively
affecting member states’ ability to support each other and encourage
participation from all stakeholders
●
Lack of agreed common data models and open standards creating
barriers for interoperability and reuse of health data
●
Limited focus on identifying opportunities to leverage secondary use of
health data to reduce health inequalities.
Relevant EU-wide policy
There are two main policy areas that impact on secondary use of health policy, as
shown in Table 2 below. We have categorised these as:
●
European vision for a data-enabled future:These policiesand directives
recognise the importance of data for enabling an open, innovative society
and economy. This group of policies and legal instruments seeks to create
the appropriate regulations, policy supports, investment and strategic
direction that enable data to be shared to improve health outcomes for all
people living in Europe.
●
Digital transformation of healthcare:These policies,initiatives and
institutions look to modernise aspects of the healthcare sector and
increase interoperability, within a member state and across borders, and
to encourage collaborative networks that create new solutions for
healthcare challenges.
12
European Commission (2021), ‘A European Strategy forData. Shaping Europe's Digital Future’,
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data7

Table 2: Relevant European policies categorised by main theme
European vision for a data-enabled futureDigital transformation of healthcare
●
General Data Protection Regulation
13
●
European Strategy for Data
14
○
Data Governance Act
15
●
White Paper on Artificial Intelligence
16
●
Final Report and Action Plan from the
Commission Expert Group on FAIR Data
17
●
Europe’s Digital Decade
18
●
Communication on enabling digital
transformation of health and care
19
○
Commission Recommendation on
a European Electronic Health
Record exchange format
20
●
1+ Million Genomes initiative
21
●
European Reference Networks
22
●
Electronic Exchange of Social Security
Information
23
●
Integrating Healthcare Enterprise
24
●
eHealth Network
25
●
One Health Action Plan Against AMR
26
In many instances, over the past three or four years, these two categories of work
have been operating independently of each other. And while the strategies that are
related to ‘Europe’s vision for a data-enabled future’ often reference other policies
within that grouping, policies and initiatives within the ‘digital transformation of
healthcare’ category often have a more independent implementation approach.
This can be seen in the fragmentation, lack of common data models, and
complexity of individual pilot and research studies being undertaken within
healthcare digital transformation efforts.The shortcomingsof integrating this
policy work were sorely tested during Covid-19, where implementations of
electronic health records by EU member states often led to a lack of
interoperability and data fragmentation across borders, and limitations in the
ability to collect and compare data from different regions to assess Covid-19 rates
and healthcare access.
There is a third emerging grouping of policy work that could create a bridge
between these two often disconnected areas. The following initiatives represent
an opportunity for a new dialogue and a new collaborative approach focused
on enabling the secondary use of health data.To achievemany of the intended
health policy goals described in the following European policies, access to health
data for secondary use purposes will be essential. This will involve multiple
stakeholders from across the digital, healthcare, and privacy domains. The key
policies and initiatives driving this joined-up approach are:
26
European Commission (2017), ‘A European One HealthAction Plan against Antimicrobial Resistance
(AMR)’,
25
European Commission, n.d., ‘eHealth Network | PublicHealth’
24
EUR-Lex (2015), ‘Commission Decision (EU) on theidentification of ‘Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise’
profiles for referencing in public procurement’
23
European Commission, n.d., ‘Digitalisation in socialsecurity coordination - Employment, Social Affairs & Inclusion’,
22
European Commission, n.d., ‘European Reference Networks’
21
European Commission (2021), ‘European “1+ MillionGenomes” Initiative’
20
European Commission (2019), ‘Recommendation on a EuropeanElectronic Health Record exchange
format’
19
European Commission (2019), ‘Communication on enablingthe digital transformation of health and care in the Digital Single Market’
18
European Commission (2021), ‘Europe's Digital Decade:Commission sets the course towards a digitally empowered Europe by 2030’
17
European Commission (2018), ‘Turning FAIR into Reality’,
16
European Commission (2020), ‘White Paper On ArtificialIntelligence - A European approach to excellence and trust’
15
European Commission (2021), ‘European data governance’
14
European Commission (2021), ‘A European Strategyfor Data. Shaping Europe's Digital Future’
13
EUR-Lex (2018),General Data Protection Regulation(GDPR)
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data8

●
European Health Data Space
27
●
Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe
28
●
European Medicine Authority Regulatory Science to 2025
29
●
Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan.
30
While these policies have other primary goals, a key common element of the
strategic work required for successful implementation of each of these initiatives is
the availability of health data for secondary use cases. Improving the secondary
use of the health data ecosystem will help ensure the success of the wider goals
articulated in these policies. It is encouraging that, in contrast to the earlier
healthcare modernisation policies, these more recent papers are able to identify
the other, current, related bodies of work that are encouraging the acceleration of
data and digitally enabled healthcare systems.
These documents, as shown in Figure 1, below, tend to be more recent, and ask:
●
What are the health sector implications of those policies that outline the
European vision for a data-enabled future?
●
How can current initiatives focused ondigital transformationof
healthcareincorporate the policy directions of thevision for a
data-enabled future?
Figure 1:
How relevant European health data policiesare connected when
categorised by main theme
30
European Commission (2021) ‘Europe's Beating CancerPlan v.24’,
29
European Medicines Agency (2020), ‘EMA RegulatoryScience to 2025’
28
European Commission (2020), ‘A pharmaceutical strategyfor Europe | Public Health’,
27
European Commission, n.d, ‘European Health Data Space| Public Health’
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data9

Overview of current strategic direction
The European Commission has significant potential to create a cohesive
ecosystem enabling the secondary use of health data. This will require
supporting member states to implement standardised, interoperable, and
collaborative health data strategies.The Commission’s‘European Strategy for
Data’ aims to create a consciously ethical approach, including robust data
protections for people and a commitment to strengthening data access and
enabling data sharing for social benefit. Policies recognise the move towards
collecting and managing ‘big data’ as an input source for innovation.
However, the paradigm shift of the ‘big data revolution’, which has enabled
large-scale and rapid data collection of rich or granular data, and new kinds of
advanced data analysis or digital products and services, also brings challenges.
Much of the legislation and regulation around data collection, management,
governance and use was developed and ratified before big data technological
developments. Their rapid growth and uptake, and the associated rate of change,
can make it difficult for policymakers to feel confident that they are anticipating
future needs, risks, and opportunities. Similarly, new potential uses of health data
– including the secondary uses of health data for personalised healthcare – are not
always easily navigated within existing health data policies.
Much hope is being placed on the ability of the proposed European Health
Data Space to overcome current fragmentation and create a new open health
data ecosystem for Europe.The European Health DataSpacewill aim to:
31
●
promote safe exchange of patients’ data (including when they travel
abroad) and citizens’ control over data about their health
●
support research on treatments, medicines, medical devices and
outcomes
●
encourage the access to and use of health data for research,
policymaking and regulation, with a trusted governance framework and
upholding data-protection rules
●
support digital health services
●
clarify the safety and liability of artificial intelligence (AI) in health.
The European Health Data Space is intended to become ‘a system for data
exchange and access which is governed by common rules, procedures and
technical standards to ensure that health data can be accessed within and
between Member States, with full respect to for the fundamental rights of
individuals’.
32
The Joint Action Towards the European Health Data Spaceis the initial step
33
to create this network.Ideally, this network willtake a multi-stakeholder
approach that encourages participation by industry, regulators, healthcare
providers, health surveillance and data system operators, patient advocacy and
consumer groups, emerging health tech startups, privacy and digital rights
advocates, and researchers. Drawing on examples for digital government
frameworks,this network could identify key use casesand priorities of work,
34
34
Publications Office of the EU (2020), ‘An ApplicationProgramming Interfaces (APIs) framework for digital government’,
33
TEHDAS (2020), ‘Joint Action for the European HealthData Space’
32
European Commission (2019),Assessment of the EUMember States’ rules on health data in the light of GDPR
31
EUR-Lex (2016), ‘EU eGovernment Action Plan 2016-2020Accelerating the digital transformation of government’
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data10

facilitate the use of open standards and common data models, and agree to build
shared services and common datasets that could be used as the backbone for
industry innovation.
On 23 June, the project group overseeing Towards the European Health Data
Space released a progress report that confirms the fragmentation challenges that
occur when attempting to share health data for secondary uses. They note that
35
current fragmentation in General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
implementation approaches at the member state level and the complex legislative
context at the European level (in which at least 15 legal provisions across multiple
legislations were identified) are preventing new public goods to be generated from
sharing and reusing health data for secondary purposes. The report recommends
that secondary use of health data be governed by specific legislation and eight
key elements are discussed where health data governance legislation could be
applied, including:
●
Patient, consent, and rights of the citizen
●
Protection and promotion of public health
●
Health research and specific data types
●
Health data as highly sensitive data
●
Exceptional need for data and cyber security
●
Health data in the private sector
●
Complex semantic interoperability
●
Fragmented regulatory framework at national level.
The work of the European Medicine Agency (EMA) and strategies detailed in the
Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe outline how foundations could be built to
enable this collaborative data ecosystem model:
●
EMA has supported the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AIand,
36
through its Heads of Medicines Agencies (HMA)/EMA Big Data Steering
Group,has outlined how these guidelines could helpinform the work of
37
an ethics committee to oversee secondary use of healthcare data, and
help in the creation of a code of conduct for the health industry on
secondary use of health data
●
Investment has led to the development of real-world data infrastructure
(DARWIN EU: the Data Analysis and Real World Interrogation Network)
38
and has supported pilot models that test use of real-world data
infrastructure for detecting drug safety issues
●
The need to create standardised tools for health technology assessment
for use across Europe has been identified.
38
European Medicines Agency (2020), ‘2.2. Proposal fora Data Analytics and Real-World Interrogation Network (DARWIN)’,
37
European Medicines Agency (2020), ‘Big data’
36
European Commission (2019), ‘Ethics guidelines fortrustworthy AI’,
35
TEHDAS (2021), 'Why health is a special case for data governance,'
https://tehdas.eu/app/uploads/2021/06/tehdas-why-health-is-a-special-case-for-data-governance-2021-0
6-23.pdfavailable from:
https://tehdas.eu/news/tehdas-analysis-health-data-needs-dedicated-eu-regulation/
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data11

Analysis of key aspects of EU policies and
implementation
The following common themes were identified as risks and blockers in the current
policy environment that may impact on the development of open and trustworthy
secondary use of health data ecosystems.
Governance:There are high expectations that the forthcomingEuropean Health
Data Space will build common data governance systems. Various European-wide
policy documents, and research papers aimed at understanding the secondary
use of health data policy context, have come to similar conclusions:
●
that there needs to be shared agreement on data consent mechanisms,
codes of conduct for use and sharing of data, common data models and
data standards
●
that common infrastructure needs to be built
●
that greater multi-stakeholder collaboration must be facilitated.
As this work commences via the Joint Action Towards the European Health Data
Space, stakeholders will be required to share their opinions and implementation
practices. This will require industry stakeholders and member states themselves to
share and agree on various models and ways forward.
One of the challenges to date, and part of the reason for the cycle of
recommendations in recent years, is that there are limited examples of
implementation and there is a reticence to express clear opinion on how to
implement the specific components being proposed. For example, open
standards are proposed, but which open standards to implement are often not
stipulated. Multiple data models exist, but there is no agreement on which should
be adopted. Sample codes of conduct are also often unavailable or unspecified. In
the past two years, including in a major review of the fragmentation in
implementing the GDPRas it applies to health datause cases, report findings
39
have returned to noting the need for codes of conduct and data infrastructure, yet
avoid stating what code of conduct principles should be adopted or how data
infrastructure should be organised.
One example of how the lack of data governance maturity is in the area of data
sharing. Data sharing is still fairly minimal across Europe, outside specific
initiatives. The ambitious 1+ Million Genomes initiative,signed by 23 countries
40
across Europe, with the aim ‘to make the personal genomic datasets accessible in
a secure manner for collective diagnostic purposes and prevention, and for
research and innovation’ found that the greatest challenge was using existing
datasets consistently and with the consent of patients. Electronic health record
data systems are often insufficiently advanced to enable sharing of data beyond
the clinical care setting.
40
European Commission (2021), ‘European “1+ MillionGenomes” Initiative’,
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/european-1-million-genomes-initiative
39
European Commission (2019),Assessment of the EUMember States’ rules on health data in the light of
GDPR
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data12

Through the ODI's work for the World Health Organization, we have identified a
41
range of data governance components that need to be addressed at the
structural, legal and technical levels. Work packages within the Towards the
European Health Data Space project are already prioritising some of these
themes. Longer term, the European Health Data Space will need to help
harmonise principles, share best practices, and provide or identify tooling to
support stakeholders to mature their health data governance in the areas shown in
Figure 2, below.
Figure 2:
Key areas of health data governance thatwill need to mature with
best practices and tooling
Increased collaboration and exchange:Across Europe,there are a wide range
of initiatives in sub-sector domains that seek to encourage data sharing. The
European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases, for example,is a European health
42
reference network aimed at improving clinical care and sharing data for research.
There is a need for greater understanding of how learnings from these models can
translate to whole-of-Europe policy and data ecosystem environments.
Role of health data in reducing inequalities:Theeconomic and societal benefits
of enabling personalised healthcare are rarely calculated and described in
European health policy documents beyond broad statements that they are
expected to create substantial benefits. A new European Partnership on
Personalised Medicinehas been identified for establishmentin 2023, and
43
43
European Commission, n.d., ‘General Information Preliminarytitle of the European Partnerships European Partnership
for personalised medicine’
42
EJP RD – European Joint Programme on Rare Diseaseshttp://www.ejprarediseases.org/
41
The ODI (2021), Preread 3: Data governance maturityand best practices,
https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/world-health-data-platform/events/health-data-governance-
summit/preread-3-who-data-governance-summit_data-governance-of-health-data.pdf?sfvrsn=ffbd4a33_1
0
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data13

recognition of the value of personalised healthcare is being referenced in new
health policies such as Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan. This plan shows how
44
there are expectations that the European Health Data Space and the 1+ Million
Genomes initiative will solve current challenges in the use of data for personalised
healthcare. There are few documents that describe how health data could be
leveraged to reduce health inequalities. For example, when large datasets are
pooled, it is possible to create meaningful analysis that addresses specific
subpopulation needs.
In the current legislative agenda, the European Parliament has prioritised social
fairness and prosperity and the mitigation of negative consequences of the
Covid-19 crisis for vulnerable social groups. Toalign with these priorities, current
45
health policy work could better describe the potential role of secondary use of
health data in reducing health inequalities.
On a global level, Europe's GDPR legislative context is influencing data privacy
legal contexts in other countries, including in low- and middle-income countries.
Donors and philanthropy organisations based in Europe are requiring their
partners in the Global South to adhere to health data regulatory environments that
align with the GDPR. This can stall funding to agencies in the Global South who
find themselves needing to build data governance systems that address GDPR
requirements to receive funding, in addition to meeting the local regulatory
context. These GDPR requirements may also impose western values on data
privacy and regulation that do not necessarily align with local cultural values, such
as those described in the CARE Framework, developed by First Nations and
Indigfenous Peoples networks. While the European Health Data Space is
predominantly about governing health data in a European setting, the adoption of
standards and legislation in Europe will have global influence. If health data is to
be governed by the EHDS under new legislation, this cannot be considered in
isolation from the rest of the world, as the European context affects global health
research. Consideration should be given to how European health data governance
could impact on geopolitical relationships, and in particular, on Europe's
commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals and the ability of low- and
middle-income countries to collect and use health data to benefit local
communities.
Investment:Funding of health system transformationis often limited across EU
member states. Member states may be able to access new funding through the
European Recovery and Resilience Facilityto enablemodernisation of data
46
infrastructure, as has been proposed by the 1+ Million Genomes initiative. EMA
47
is currently working on standardised tools for health technology assessment.
There is currently limited standardisation in models for collecting data on social
health insurance, which could be used to help drive greater planning and
healthcare service optimisation.
47
European Commission (2021), ‘European “1+ MillionGenomes” Initiative’
46
European Commission (2021),Recovery and ResilienceFacility | European Commission
45
European Commission (December 2020), 'Joint Declarationof the European Parliament, the Council of
the European Union and the European Commission'
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/joint-declaration-legislative-priorities-2021.pdf
44
European Commission (2021),‘2021 01 25 Communication- Europe's Beating Cancer Plan v.24’,
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data14

Forward look
Overall, there are encouraging signs at the European level that health data
ecosystems are maturing to support secondary use of health data; however,
many of the initiatives are still fragmented and there will be significant work
required to establish robust health data ecosystems and infrastructure for
data reuse.Newer policy developments are showinga greater focus on
coordinating strategies across various stakeholders, initiatives and, importantly,
member states.
However, one of the central challenges remains the disconnect between the
European GDPR and opportunities to reuse health data in innovative ways. While
the GDPR provides a strong foundation for secondary use of health data,data
governance tools are needed to enable data reuse within, and beyond, the
European healthcare system. Examples include codes of conduct, ethics
committees, infrastructure for real world data and real world evidence,
stronger data institutions, and clearer legal frameworks.
The challenge in recent years is that data governance gaps are well known, but
there has been a lack of consensus building to encourage new agreements and
create the necessary infrastructure beyond one-off pilot projects. Multiple reports
and project summarieshave agreed that current approachesto data collection
48
and sharing are fragmented, and that ethical frameworks are needed to oversee
how data will be shared in future with appropriate protections for sensitive data.
But action has not yet been taken to create the multistakeholder settings that
encourage agents to resolve the roadblocks. We hope that the EHDS will facilitate
a clear roadmap that creates mechanisms to co-operate to this end.
This white paper aims to share some initial research we have undertaken when
mapping the secondary use of health data policy landscape in Europe. We are
releasing it now to support European health data stakeholders to consider the
current policy landscape when responding to the European Health Data Space
consultation which closes on 26 July 2021.
We invite readers tocontact ODIto discuss any feedbackon this report and to
share perspectives on how best to shape a trusted and trustworthy health data
ecosystem for secondary use of health data in the European region.
Find out more about thiswhite paper, and the accompanyingbriefing event here.
48
Including:'Why health is a special case for datagovernance',A pharmaceutical strategy for Europe|
Public Health’, ‘An Application Programming Interfaces(APIs) framework for digital government’,
Assessment of the EU Member States’ rules on health data in the light of GDPR', ‘Proposal for a Data
Analytics and Real-World Interrogation Network (DARWIN),2021 01 25 Communication - Europe's Beating
Cancer Plan v.24
Open Data Institute 2021 / White paperEU policy on secondary use of health data15