



Contents
About2
Executive summary3
Introduction4
Context4
Focus of the report4
Who is this report for?4
How should you use this report?5
Definitions5
Data Governance and Online Learning Data7
Summary7
Stakeholders7
What are online learning data?8
Online learning data flows9
Data governance of online learning data11
Considerations for Online Learning Data Governance12
Summary and action points12
The impact of moving from physical classrooms to online hybrid learning12
Considerations: Digital Monitoring16
Summary and action points16
Data protection and data governance for online learning16
Online learning and technology17
Lecture recording and remote proctoring17
Considerations: Data Protection and Privacy19
Summary and action points19
Technology19
Platforms19
Institutional policies for online learning20
Governing Online Learning Data21
Summary21
The Impact of COVID-1921
Digital Monitoring21
Data Protection and Privacy22
Models for the governance of online learning data23
Survey and Scoping25
Gathering empirical data25
Survey25
Preliminary observations26
Discussion27
Summary27
Limitations and caveats27
Concluding remarks27
Resources List29
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning1

About
This report was produced as part of the ODI research fellow scheme. Its author was
Janis Wong, a PhD Researcher at the University of St Andrews, with contributions
from Mahlet (Milly) Zimeta, ODI.
If you want to share feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact Janis at
jccw@st-andrews.ac.uk.
If you would like to learn more about the ODI research fellow scheme, please visit the
information and application page, or contact us atfellowships@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning2

Executive summary
Data governance considerations and evidence for
higher education institutions working with online
learning data
The Covid-19 pandemic has increased the adoption of technology in education by
higher education institutions in the UK.Althoughstudents are expected to return to
1
in-person classes, online learning and the digitisation of the academic experience are
here to stay. This includes the increased gathering, use and processing of digital
data.
2
These changes mean a rethink of traditional data governance strategies for education
is needed, to adapt them for the online learning environment. Although higher
education institutions have long considered how digital technologies can be used to
help shape the future of learning, little consideration has been given to data
governance of online learning and how other forms of educational data impact the
academic experience of students and staff in the long term.
Innovative and forward-thinking data governance strategies should take into account
the collection and processing of student and staff administrative data, as well as
teaching data; explore how digital tools are used to benefit learning; and look at what
the data archival practices are at an institutional level. Such governance strategies
create new opportunities to improve the value of data within higher education
institutions.
Data governance in online learning
In order to create an online learning strategy that is fit for the future of digital
education, university management needs to consider how online learning data should
be governed. This includes:
●
governing research data as well as student and staff personal data related to
teaching, administration and the data processed by external platforms
●
addressing the benefits to, and concerns of, students and staff as the largest
groups of stakeholders in delivering secure and safe academic experiences
●
deciding what education technology platforms should be used to deliver,
record and store online learning content, by comparing the merits of
improving user experience against potential risks to vast data collection by
third parties
●
balancing education innovation with the protection of student and staff
personal data through data governance, management and infrastructure
strategies.
2
The Observer, Fleming N (2021), ‘After Covid, willdigital learning be the new normal?’
1
Office for National Statistics (2020), ‘Coronavirusand the impact on students in higher education in
England: September to December 2020’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning3

Online learning data governance needs to be considered holistically, with an
understanding of how different stakeholders interact with each other’s data to create
innovative, digital means of learning.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning4

Introduction
Context
In our data-driven society, digital technologies are increasingly becoming a part of
our everyday lives. This includes education. The framing of educational data has been
described by Borgman as ‘grey data’,where the linesof research, teaching, learning,
3
services and administration data blur in the context of universities, raising questions
around privacy and data governance. Academic data collection has become more
complex due to the open access requirements of institutions, as well as the
accumulation of such grey datain daily academic life.This is further complicated
where private and corporate stakeholders use this data for third party purposes, such
as assessing university rankings, exam proctoring or graduate surveys.
Before the Covid-19 pandemic, the challenges around data in education–specifically
online learning and ethical frameworks for managing data–were already being
identified. However, online learning has exponentially accelerated during the Covid-19
pandemic, with students, staff and academic institutions having to rely on
technologies and educational platforms to deliver lessons, record classes and
introduce new interactive methods of learning. From reports ofstudentand staff
surveillance,to concerns aroundonline learningharassmentand ‘Zoom-bombing’
4
(where a person joins a Zoom meeting without invitation and aims to disrupt the
session), thedigitisation of online learningnotonly affects the academic experience,
but also the relationship between educational institutions and how they collect, use
and process personal data related to students and staff.
Other data-related issues involve how research data is collected and stored, how
digital materials are archived, and how student and staff data is secured for purposes
other than online teaching. While these data management processes are often
considered separately, they all fall within the wider remit of how data, and more
specifically online learning data, is governed and managed at higher education
institutions.
Focus of this report
This report examines the relationship between higher education institutions and the
online learning data they collect, process and share; outlining how online learning
data can be better governed and managed. This includes bridging the gap between
research into online learning data pre-pandemic, and the research and policy
recommendations resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic. This report outlines current
data governance practices and recommendations, how educational institutions can
balance the need for innovative learning with privacy of the community, and new
4
Edwards L, Martin L, Henderson T (2018), ‘EmployeeSurveillance: The Road to Surveillance is Paved with
Good Intentions’.
3
Borgman CL (2018), ‘Open Data, Grey Data, and Stewardship:Universities at the Privacy Frontier’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning5

opportunities for how academic institutions should govern data.
Who is this report for?
This report is for individuals and organisations such as EdTech platforms and
university management that have to process, manage or govern data, as well as
policymakers who have to provide guidance on data governance or develop data
infrastructure strategies related to online learning. This includes:
●
university and higher education management
●
education policymakers
●
technology platforms that create digital services for higher education
institutions.
This report can be used to inform product development, data management and new
data governance strategies.
How should you use this report?
This report is designed to help you and your organisation understand what online
learning data is, why online learning data should be considered more widely as part
of data governance, and how you can go about incorporating online learning data
considerations into a data governance strategy.
Each section and subsection has summaries, action points, key points and
concluding remarks, to help you identify the most important information and guide
your next steps.
Links and resources have been included throughout this report, for more in-depth
information on each topic.
Definitions
To clarify the scope and application of this report, the following are definitions and
how we use specific terms:
Academic data
Academic data refers to data collected, processed and used by higher education
institutions that relates to the academic element of education. This includes
examination and coursework data, and research data.
Data governance
Data governance refers to the technical, legal, policy and management
considerations that support data within specific contexts and environments. (See also
theData governance and online learning datasection)
Data protection
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning6

Data protection in this report refers to the protection of personal data regulated under
the UK Data Protection Act (DPA) 2018 and the EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) 2018.
Digital technologies and platforms
Digital technologies and digital platforms are online tools, applications and services
that enable the collection, distribution and sharing of information.
Education technologies (EdTech)
Adopted from the UK Department for Education,educationtechnology (EdTech)
5
refers to the practice of using technology to support teaching and the effective
day-to-day management of education institutions. It includes hardware (such as
tablets, laptops or other digital devices), and digital resources, software and services
that aid teaching, meet specific needs, and help with the daily running of education
institutions (such as management information systems, information sharing platforms
and communication tools).
Higher education institutions
Higher education (HE) institutions include universities or an institution conducted by a
higher education corporation in the UK. For the purposes of this report, the terms
universities and higher education institutions are used interchangeably.
Online learning
Online learning is learning and education that is conducted in a digital environment
and facilitated using digital platforms.
Online learning data
Online learning data covers all aspects of data that is collected, stored and
processed within higher education institutions. This includes teaching material,
research outputs, lecture recordings, student administrative information and
examination results. (See also theWhat is onlinelearning data?section)
It is important to note that online learning data can have been in a non-digital format
in the past, and so although the same type of data may have previously been
gathered, the digital processing of such data has allowed it to be more easily
accessed, managed and retrieved.
Personal data
Following the UK DPA and EU GDPR, personal data refers to information relating to
natural persons who can be identified or are identifiable both directly and indirectly
from different information sources. (See also theWhat is online learning data?
section)
Surveillance
Surveillance refers to the observation or supervision of a group, with or without the
group knowing that they are being observed, usually with the suspicion of
malpractice or with the intent to prevent malpractice. Digital surveillance uses
technologies to conduct this observation.
5
UK Department for Education (2019), ‘Realising thepotential of technology in education’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning7

Data governance and
online learning data
In order to examine how online learning data should be governed by higher education
institutions, we need to understand what types of online learning data there are and
how such data is created or used, and explore broader questions surrounding data
governance for online learning.
Summary
●
In higher education institutions, different stakeholders interact with and create
online learning data for different purposes.
●
There are many types of online learning data, including teaching data and
related materials, administrative data, and research data.
●
Online learning data is managed independently at different stages, but it is
important to identify how online learning data follows through the education
process and changes over time across different stakeholders.
●
When considering how online learning data should be governed, strategies
should be targeted towards specific stakeholders and data flows.
Stakeholders
Before identifying the relationship between higher education institutions, online
learning data and data governance, it is important to first identify the stakeholders
involved. As well as students, other internal and external stakeholders playing key
roles are also involved. Internal stakeholders include teaching staff, research staff,
university management, and librarians and archivers. External stakeholders include
technology providers and higher education advocacy institutions.
In the table below, we list each relevant stakeholder within the online learning sector,
summarising their main motivation and actions in relation to online learning.
STAKEHOLDERMOTIVATIONACTION
HE studentsStudy and make the most of resources
that are available in the online learning
environment
Learning to use and access online
resources through traditional and new
online learning platforms such as emails,
moodle pages and video platforms
HE teaching staffProvide the best possible learningLearning to use traditional and new
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning8

experience to students using the
resources and equipment available to
them in the online learning environment
online learning platforms as allowed by
their institution to deliver teaching and
materials
HE research staffConduct the best possible research and
present their research
Using the most suitable platform for
publishing and sharing their outputs and
research data as well as archiving their
work with their institution
Librarians and
archivers
Enable staff and students to conduct their
best work through library resources and
data management techniques
Providing support for staff and students
in order to find the best resources to use
in their work as well as the best ways to
store and access their data for
dissemination and retention
Data protection
officers
Protect student and staff personal dataKeeping up to date with data protection
regulations, implementing those
regulations in university policies, and
responding to data protection requests
where necessary
University
management
Support their university’s strategy and
promote their institution to external
students, staff and organisations
Create data management and data
governance strategies for their institution
Educational
technology
platforms
Provide technology capabilities to
facilitate online learning
Develop applications to be used within
existing university infrastructures for
online learning
Higher education
advocacy groups
Advocate for the position of their
members within education
Establish policies that reflect the
benefits and challenges in online
learning and education for their
members
Education
policymakers
Create supportive, competitive, long-term
strategies for online learning and
education for higher education in both
local and international contexts
Engage a wide range of stakeholders to
provide input on developing an
education strategy that best reflects
innovative and forward-thinking
considerations for online learning
Key points
●
There are a number of stakeholders in online learning, many of whom do not
interact with each other during their journey through education.
●
All stakeholders play an active role in their area for advancing their
experience in education or the experience of their target audience.
●
Understanding their motivations and actions can help explain their
relationship with you or other stakeholders, as well as their data.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning9

What is online learning data?
Online learning data can be split into three main areas: teaching data and associated
materials, administrative data, and research data. Teaching data and its associated
materials refers to the data that is used for the purposes of teaching to fulfil academic
purposes. Administrative data refers to data that is used to keep a record of student
and staff roles at the university and to track their progress. Research data refers to
data that is collected for the purposes of research. Although research data itself may
not play a lead role in online learning, the processes and policies by which research
data is managed and stored can affect other types of online learning data. It is
important to note that these types of data and how they are created or used by
stakeholders is not hierarchical, and they all have important functions as part of the
online learning environment.
Identifying what constitutes online learning data is important because it helps in
understanding the complexity of governing data in digital education. A successful
data governance strategy for online learning must consider all forms of data and how
they are used by various stakeholders.
Key points
●
Online learning data is varied and constantly changing.
●
Understanding what types of online learning data there are can help better
govern these forms of data, opening up new opportunities for both innovation
and management.
Online learning data flows
To illustrate how different types of online learning data are created and passed
through the online learning ecosystem, we havemappedout the data flowsto
demonstrate how different stakeholders interact with the same type of online learning
data.
The online learning data flows can be mapped using the ODIData Ecosystem
Mapping toolandData Landscape Playbook. The toolidentifies the data, the
stakeholders related to the data, and their relationships. The types of data and
stakeholders are identified, and it is recognised that stakeholders and their roles may
overlap or cross-over.
Online Learning Data Flows
Creating teaching data:
●
Teaching staff: deliver
●
Students: contribute
●
University management: facilitate
Recording teaching data:
●
Teaching staff: record
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning10

●
Students: access
●
University technology: record
●
University library/archiver: preserve
Storing research data:
●
Research staff and students: manage
●
Administrative staff: manage
●
University technology: manage
●
University library: manage
●
Data protection officer: protect
Publicising teaching data and research publications:
●
Research staff: share
●
Students: share
●
University technology: share
●
University library/archiver: share
Student administrative data:
●
Students: provide
●
University technology: collect and delete
●
University management: reuse and generate
●
University library/archiver: delete
Student examinations and academic data:
●
Students: provide
●
University technology: monitor
All online learning data:
●
Data protection: govern
●
University management: govern and deliver
Following the Data Ecosystem Mapping tool, these types of data and their
stakeholders can be sorted into more generalised categories:
●
Datarepresenting teaching data, academic data, researchdata and
administrative data.
●
Goodsrepresenting academic data resources.
●
Moneyrepresenting direct transfer of finances inexchange for another form
of data or service.
●
Servicesrepresenting the platform or tool for whichdata can be utilised.
These data flows can be mapped into a diagram based on the Data Ecosystem
Mapping tool, demonstrating the relationship not only between stakeholders and
data, but also how this could affect relationships between the stakeholders
themselves.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning11

Figure 1:The primary types of information (data,goods, money and services) flow
between different stakeholders. All forms of data are seen as two-way flows, with the
dotted lines representing indirect relationships.
Key points
●
In order to better govern online learning data, it is important to understand
what the data ecosystem is like for the online learning and higher education
ecosystem.
●
Mapping the online learning data flows can help clarify how data travels and
transforms throughout the institution, and highlight which areas may need
support.
Data governance of online learning data
Data governance of online learning data includes technical, legal, policy and
management considerations that help support the online learning data flows within
higher education institutions.
Good online learning data governance should outline how different types of online
learning data affect the institution and how the data should be protected; illustrate the
benefits to the inclusion of certain technologies and data management methods;
respond to stakeholders’ concerns; and suggest practical solutions for how the
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning12

institution can balance innovative implementation of digital strategies with limiting the
risks to additional data collection and processing.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning13

Considerations for online
learning data governance
Summary and action points
●
The shift to online learning has significantly impacted how institutions interact
with student and staff personal data, with the increase of data gathering,
service provision, and transfer to digital resources by higher education
institutions.
●
This includes changes in stakeholder relationships with their personal data
and the increasing importance of data protection and privacy in the digital
classroom.
●
When creating data governance strategies for online learning, these issues
must be taken into consideration in order to establish trust between
stakeholders and trust in how institutions use their data.
●
Although higher education institutions and their staff members have been
making the most of technological tools to limit the negative impacts of the
pandemic during the early introduction of online learning, more long-term
data governance strategies for online learning are needed to better support
institutional data practices.
●
When considering how online learning data should be governed, higher
education institutions need to better understand how data flows have
changed as a result of online learning, and determine to what extent online
learning will continue in order to better support the university community.
●
Policymakers should address how data infrastructures will be strengthened
and how education data should be governed in light of the rapid acceleration
of online learning.
●
Current technology providers and new EdTech  companies need to
understand how institutions use their platforms and how data flows through
institutions to deliver better services to students, staff and universities.
The impact of moving from physical classrooms
to online hybrid learning
Prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, higher education institutions had beenincorporating
technologyinto their teaching, learning and researchpractices. From the introduction
of email, to the use of laptops by students, technology has allowed for more flexible
ways of working and fostered more methods for collaboration and sharing of
information. However, it is important to identify how the digitisation of education and
increase of online learning data has also impacted stakeholder relationships with
education and their institutions.As blended learningis set to continue, in order to
6
6
Dhawan S (2020), ‘Online Learning: A Panacea in theTime of COVID-19 Crisis. Journal of Educational
Technology Systems’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning14

accommodate the impact of the pandemic, students are beginning to express
dissatisfaction in their online learning experience,with university leaders often not
consulting them on future plans. In this report, although we identify some of the new
challenges that have emerged as a result of adapting to online learning through
Covid-19, we recognise the efforts that students, staff and institutions have all made
in transitioning to the digital classroom at short notice. This section outlines the
impact of moving from physical classrooms to online learning, both pre-pandemic
and during the pandemic.
While the full effects of moving to online learning have yet to be seen, some research
has been done to assess the impact on students and staff at higher education
institutions. As education is transferred online, it has been shown that over-reliance
on lecture recordings may negatively impact student attainment.During the
7
pandemic, 74% of students report that exams and assessments are now being
carried out online, with 27% reporting that some marks are being based on previous
assessments.For staff, chilling effects of employeesurveillance in the classroom
8
have also been identified.Staff may also be lesswilling to teach certain topics,
9
especially if a class is recorded, and may limit the time dedicated to general
discussion. Research has recently been conducted to map how higher education
institutions have implemented cloud infrastructures, comparing institutions’ level of
migration to public cloud services.
10
As a result, when considering privacy-preserving solutions in education, in order to
ensure that student privacy frameworks align with students’ digital practices,
stakeholders should incorporate robust ways for students to participate in the
discussion about the best ways to tackle outstanding and fu ture student data privacy
challenges.
11
To consider how online learning has changed the relationship with online learning
data and to illustrate the impact of this, we adapt each type of data below:
Creating teaching data:
●
More online teaching data is being created
●
All classes are happening online
●
New technologies introduced in a short timeframe to enable online teaching
Recording teaching data:
●
Most if not all teaching data is recorded
●
Potentially stored in different ways, even if teaching was previously recorded
Storing research data:
●
More research data being stored online
Publicising teaching data and research publications:
11
Plunkett L, Gasser U, Cortesi S (2019). ‘StudentPrivacy and the Law in the Internet Age’.
10
Fiebig T, Gürses S, Gañán CH, Kotkamp E, Kuipers F, Lindorfer M, Prisse M, Sari T (2021), ‘Heads inthe
Clouds: Measuring the Implications of Universities Migrating to Public Clouds’.
9
Edwards L, Martin L, Henderson T (2018), ‘EmployeeSurveillance: The Road to Surveillance is Paved with
Good Intentions’.
8
Edge Foundation (2020), ‘The impact of Covid-19 oneducation: A summary of evidence on the early
impacts of lockdown’.
7
Edwards M, Clinton M (2019), ‘A study exploring theimpact of lecture capture availability and lecture
capture usage on student attendance and attainment’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning15

●
Greater emphasis on digital sharing due to lack of physical events
●
New medium for sharing explored due to international and geographical
differences and allowing for as much sharing as possible
●
Greater shift towards openness, both in terms of open access publication
and in the dissemination of restricted information
Student administrative data:
●
More stored as part of online teaching; data derived from online teaching but
not part of it, for example taking attendance
●
ID checks being conducted online and through software and cameras, rather
than in person
●
Student feedback all processed online
●
Student services such as physical and mental health; any pastoral support
outside of academic support
Student examinations and academic data:
●
All exams are held online
●
More academic data gathered online, including coursework
The impact of online learning can also be mapped onto the data ecosystem,
extending Figure 1, as shown in Figure 2. This demonstrates how data flow may
change as a result of the digitisation of learning and what future opportunities there
are to strengthen the online learning process. Data, goods, money and services are
included as direct data flows, and support as an indirect data flow. Detailed
definitions of these terms can be found on the Data Ecosystem Mapping tool, but are
broadly defined in the list above.
Figure 2:The primary types of information (data,goods, money and services) flow
between different stakeholders, where solid arrowheads demonstrate the greater
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning16

transfer of information and data to specific stakeholders. This suggests that who,
what and how data travels through the education data ecosystem has changed as a
result of online learning. The boxes outside the map demonstrate the future
opportunities for developing data governance strategies for online learning.
Some higher education institutions have successfully modelled their education
environment to be solely digital. The main example isThe Open University (OU). As
the largest university in the UK, the OU has long had online distance learning
courses. In the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, the OU was much better equipped
to close their campus and continue online learning. This also means that the OU is in
a better position to protect and manage data for education.
The OU is transparent on its website about how student and staff data is used. There
is a specific page forstudent dataand how differenttypes of students have their data
managed differently. There is also aPrivacy at theOUpage that outlines where data
is held, what rights data subjects have, staff data protection, alumni data protection,
and other data related to external organisations and corporations. Both full length
documents and summary documents are provided. The OU also provides links to its
strategy and policies, which have information on howdata fits into its overall
workings as an institution.
While the OU’s policies may not be suitable for hybrid learning institutions, it
demonstrates how online learning can be implemented successfully without
detriment to innovative educational practices.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning17

Key points
●
The rapid transition from physical classrooms to online learning has
exponentially increased dependence on digital services for delivering
education, thus increasing the amount of online learning data that institutions
have to govern.
●
Existing research, frameworks and guidance can help support online learning
infrastructures within and from outside institutions
●
While this may disrupt the distribution of resources within the institution, it
also highlights new opportunities for innovation, governance and policy.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning18

Considerations: digital
monitoring
Summary and action points
●
When considering how online learning data should be governed, university
management and institutions should identify their aims in implementing
certain technologies and evaluate whether they help achieve those aims.
●
Developers of platforms and technologies that deliver online learning should
understand that students, staff and other university stakeholders may
consider certain technological functionalities to be unnecessary, or even
detrimental to academic freedom and discussion.
●
Policymakers should provide guidance for data governance in relation to
electronic means of assessments and examinations, taking into account the
impact technology has on academic performance and progression within
higher education.
Data protection and data governance for online
learning
Although online learning and its socio-technical and policy impacts have been
explored, there are currently no sector-wide policies for online learning, lecture
recording or use of teaching platforms. The UK’sInformationCommissioner’s Office
has publishedThe Employment Practices Codeon topicssuch as employment
12
records and monitoring at work, to provide employers with the best data protection
practices that comply with existing regulations. However, this is only suggested as a
guide and is not education-specific. As a result, educational institutions have had to
quickly establish working practices to accommodate new ways of learning.
As lecture capture, tutorial recording and educational monitoring start being
implemented and, in many cases, become mandatory,university experiencefor both
staff and students is affected. As classes are being recorded and monitored, students
and staff may less willingly participate in them, creating achilling effect on education.
Apart from academic content, the shift to online learning also affects how institutions
process data subjects’ (those about whom data are collected, used and processed;
in this case students and staff) data. The GDPR offers solutions such as applying
fairness and transparency principles and exercising data subject rights. However, this
may be insufficient where data subjects have no choice but to accept their
institutions’ terms or belocked outof academia.There is also a lack of consideration
of group rights under the GDPR, which could affect specific classes and
demographics of students and staff, further highlighting the power imbalances
12
ICO (2018), ‘The Employment Practices Code’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning19

between them and their institutions.
Theoreticalandempiricalwork has found that the use of e-proctoring could further
students’ desire to cheat and rebel against surveillance systems. In a recent example,
a studentexercised their data protection rights underthe GDPRto find out how their
e-proctoring software works.
There is also friction between online learning and the GDPR within higher education
institutions when it comes to student and staff personal data.For example, it may
13
be unclear what the roles and responsibilities of protecting personal data are; there
may be a lack of transparency around the processing and possibility to effectively
exercise data subjects’ rights; there may be uncertainty around data transfers outside
the EU; and there may be challenges to the legality of e-proctoring systems.
Online learning and technology
Digital technologies have long been implemented for online learning at universities.
The Open University offers flexible distance learning for undergraduate and
postgraduate degrees.Massively Open Online Courses(MOOC) offer courses on
platforms such as Future Learn, EdX and Coursera by partnering with academic
institutions. However, in the space of two weeks, the Covid-19 pandemic propelled
universities that didn’t have the technological infrastructure to runonline classesfor
thousands of students, not only across the country, but across the globe. Online
learning platforms have also experienced aspike intheir reachduring lockdown in
the UK. This raises the question of the extent to which institutions were equipped to
handle an exponential amount of data. Additionally, it also raises concerns about how
data may be collected, used and processed during this period of online learning.
Although measures have been taken to ensure that the data gathered through online
platforms is protected, some of these technologies have been used to monitor
students and staff behind the scenes. For example, theMicrosoft Office Productivity
Score, running in the background of Microsoft applicationssuch as Microsoft Teams,
tracks the time and activity of its users, producing data on the extent to which
individuals are working on its platform. Initially, this data could be accessed by
institutions and linked to specific usernames. Only after privacy concerns were raised
online did Microsoftremove usernames and change howthe data gathered is
presented. Even if higher education institutions donot access or use this data, it
could still be collected by digital platforms and may be shared and sold to third
parties. Particularly where universities are public institutions, these data collection
and processing practices should be made transparent to those who use these
technologies for online learning.
Home-working has also introduced new aspects of informal staff monitoring, blurring
the line between home and work environments. For example, if a worker would
normally log in to meetings by turning on their video, but one day they are in a car or
a new location, the employer might think they arenot committed or focused enough.
While traditional forms of register taking or swipe card access data were collected in
13
Angiolini C, Ducato R, Giannopoulou A, Schneider G (2020). ‘Remote Teaching During the Emergency
and Beyond: Four Open Privacy and Data Protection Issues of ‘Platformised’ Education’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning20

physical classrooms, the shift to online learning introduces new questions around the
ethics of carerelated to online and remote work.New organisational conditions need
to be addressed to support institutions’ duty of care for the health and safety of their
community, without necessarily needing to deploy new technologies or conduct
long-term monitoring.
Lecture recording and remote proctoring
To accommodate for students and staff working across the globe due to the
pandemic, lecture recording has been more widely adopted to ensure the access of
content across time zones and provide academic resources to accommodate for
potential absences. Whilelecture capture may be beneficial,the recording of lectures
and tutorials may also have an unsettling effect on staff and student participation in
classes,affecting their content and contributions.More generally, with online learning
being accessed in the home environment, the pandemic has resulted in a shift from
workplace monitoring to takingsurveillance technologieshome, for both staff and
students. It may also encourage moreinformal monitoring,such as assumptions
about a person’s commitment or attention to work based on whether they have their
camera on. There may also be extraterritorial harms wherepolitically sensitive topics
may be taught. Despite these challenges, it is important to note that staff and
institutions use lecture capture and recording tools as a means to continue their
responsibilities for providing students with the means to study during the pandemic.
As we transition away from using these technologies, institutions should reassess the
purpose and usefulness of these tools and whether they enhance learning and
teaching.
In addition to lecture recording, higher education institutions have also introduced
online proctoring and remote proctoring servicesaspart of online learning, tomonitor
studentsduring tutorials and exams as a means totrack engagement and prevent
potential malpractice. While the aim of proctoring technologies may be to ensure that
students make the most out of their online learning experience and level the playing
field when it comes to assessments, the use of these technologies could result in
academic and data-related risks. Remote proctoring services can negatively impact
students where it requires access to technology that not all students are guaranteed
to have; can constitute an invasion of privacy for students; and can discriminate
against students of colour and disabled students.In order to balance these risks,
14
institutions could consider scrapping proctoring systems in favour of a
people-centred approach, through investing in instructional design staff and faculty
development programming to help transition to authentic assessments.
14
Silverman S, Caines A, Casey C, de Hurtado BG, Riviere J, Sintjago A,  Vecchiola C (2021), ‘What
Happens When You Close the Door on Remote Proctoring? Moving Toward Authentic Assessments with a
People-Centered Approach’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning21

Considerations: data
protection and privacy
Summary and action points
●
When considering how online learning data should be governed, university
management and institutions should consider data protection and privacy as
part of the data governance process, particularly as stakeholders spend more
of their university experience online.
●
Developers of platforms and technologies should work with institutions to
establish clear data protection practices that follow university guidance and
codes of conduct.
●
Policymakers should provide guidance and standards for data protection and
privacy to ensure more consistency in how institutions across the country can
better protect their stakeholders.
Technology
Developers of digital platforms have responded to privacy and data protection
concerns as their technologies have scaled and become staples for online learning.
Following incidents ofZoom-bombing, all Zoom meetingsnow require a password to
join unless attendees are joining by directly clicking on a meeting link with an
embedded password. Zoom has also committed to implementingend-to-end
encryptionfor all users; however this was challengedin aclass action privacy lawsuit.
Microsoft Teams now allows users to createprivatechannelson their platform and IT
administration has been integrated into the platform. Microsoft has also committed to
supporting end-to-end encryption for one-to-one Teams calls.
There have also been crowdsourced, public efforts for improving the ethical data and
technology landscape during online learning. For example, online documents such as
A Comprehensive Guide to Tech Ethics and Zoom Classand theCoronavirus Tech
Handbookwere created to support students, staff andresearchers in making ethical
and data protection-friendly decisions when it comes to online learning.
Platforms
As more privately owned technologies are used for online learning, the digitisation of
higher education may result in further commercialisation of public education, with
limited benefit for students and staff.Many of theonline learning platforms adopted
15
by higher education institutions were not created with education as their primary
15
Williamson B, Hogan A (2021), ‘Pandemic Privatisationin Higher Education: Edtech & University Reform’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning22

purpose, but for business-oriented cloud services. These technologies were
implemented by higher education institutions due to existing paid licensing, limited
alternatives, and relative ease of adoption due to already being part of the digital
ecosystem. Institutional barriers remain higher for adoption of new technologies for
online learning due to the need for scale and accessibility from global cohorts of
students. The cost of adopting and using these platforms is also shifted to students
and faculty, rather than being internalised by universities and management.
Another consideration with the shift to online learning is how intellectual property and
information rights are managed for digital materials. Although the digitisation and
increased openness of data and research dissemination through libraries and public
means are encouraged, where copyright should not be used as reason to paywall a
publication, caution must be shown when repurposing materials that are used for
teaching and learning.
Intellectual property and ownership of teaching materialsremains a challenge with the
shift from physical to online learning. In an extreme example, during Covid-19, a
student tweeted that when attempting to send their professor an email, they
discovered that the professor delivering their recorded lecture was in factdead.
Where classes are recorded on EdTech platforms, it is unclearwho has intellectual
property rightsto the content. Further, pre-Covid,academic institutions have been
caughtrepurposing academic contentfor teaching withoutthe consent or knowledge
of the staff who created the teaching materials in the first place. For students, there
have been long-standing questions about the ownership of intellectual property over
essays submitted through plagiarism detection platforms.FAIR (Findability,
Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reuse) useoftencovers what and how resources
are to be used for academic purposes, but the shift to online learning and increased
use of digital learning technologies have introduced new examples that not only
demonstrate issues related to how data protection may be neglected where the
collection and use of data may not have been transparent, but also highlight the
potential mismanagement of educational data in the digital environment.
Institutional policies for online learning
From an institutional perspective, organisations have written guides to promote best
practices for online learning and offered guidelines for adapting institutional policies
for online learning. For example,JISChas writtenguides for recording lecturesand
16
the legal considerations required under copyright and data protection legislation. The
organisation has also worked alongside theNationalUnion of Studentsto provide a
code of practice for learning analytics.
17
The UKDepartment for Educationhas also outlinedhow cloud services and
educational applicationsshould be governed followingthe UK’s DPA, identifying
18
schools’ data protection obligations to be: overarching legal requirements, data
processing, data confidentiality, data integrity, service availability, considerations of
transfers beyond the EEA, and concerns related to the use of advertising. While this
publication focuses on schools, the approach could be applied to higher education
18
Department of Education (2014), ‘Cloud (educationalapps) software services and the Data Protection
Act: Departmental advice for local authorities, school leaders, school staff and governing bodies’.
17
JISC (2018), ‘Code of practice for learning analytics’.
16
JISC (2020), ‘Recording lectures: legal considerations’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning23

institutions due to the similar nature of content delivery and provision.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning24

Governing online
learning data
Summary
●
Covid-19 has significantly sped up the digitisation of learning and education.
It is now necessary to think beyond the pandemic and strengthen data
governance for online learning in the long term.
●
E-proctoring and similar monitoring technologies need to be properly
governed through institutional data protection practices and not have the
responsibility passed on to technology providers.
●
Data protection must be considered as part of the data governance strategies
in online learning as it plays a key role in increasing transparency and trust
between staff, students and institutions. This goes hand-in-hand with
government investment in digital learning and teaching infrastructure,
ensuring that new online learning pedagogies include robust data protection
and data security considerations.
The impact of Covid-19
With the accelerated shift towards online learning and the knowledge gained through
the implementation of online learning in 2020, organisations and institutions have
conducted empirical research to identify how good online learning practices can be
established for the future. This section provides an overview of some of the research
and potential guidance on strengthening data governance for online learning in the
long-term, identifying the opportunities for advancing the adoption of digital
technologies for higher education, while considering stakeholders’ potential
data-related concerns.
In considering the future of online learning post-pandemic, JISC has providedfour
key recommendations for the 2021/22 academic yearfor the digital content and
delivery of education:
1.Individual institutions need to strategically plan the digital transformation of
learning and teaching.
2.The HE sector should develop new economic models for developing digital
teaching materials.
3.Universities should move to blended learning, with students co-designing
curricula.
4.And lastly, the government, universities and funders should combine totackle
digital poverty. While teaching and learning throughthe digital environment
has helped protect staff and students from health risks, it has also resulted in
education that can take place atany time and anywhere,which can make
communication itself more difficult in the online space.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning25

Regarding the deployment of technologies to facilitate online learning for the future,
higher education institutions should consider expanding the deployment of digital
infrastructures more broadly, creating online opportunities that enhance the academic
experience as a whole. This not only encourages creative and innovative thinking
when it comes to adopting technology for online learning, but facilitates wider
discussion about how data can be better controlled, supported and protected at an
institutional level. As students and staff become more aware of how their data is
being used by their institutions, university management also has to consider how
data and data protection policies are communicated to them in order to facilitate trust
in online learning and the digital university experience.
Digital monitoring
When considering whether to deliver online learning and, if so, what platforms should
be used, higher education institutions need to balance the need for widespread
accessibility and scale with other concerns such asprivacy and ethicsunder existing
guidance and regulations. Rather than being governed by technology, higher
education institutions should actively create standards and ethical guidelines for
online learning with evidence of staff and student impact.If e-proctoring and
19
monitoring technologies are found to be ineffective, detrimental to wellbeing, or not fit
for purpose, educational institutions should stop implementing them as soon as
possible, rather than waiting for licences to elapse or hoping that the technology will
improve in the future. If these technologies are used, institutions have a responsibility
to explain how and why they are being implemented, what the platform’s purposes
are, and what the platform will not be used for should there be additional
functionalities.
Assessing the impact and ethical challenges of online learning,The Berkman Klein
Center for Internet & Societyexamined the ethical,human rights and societal aspects
of digital transformation.The considerations includeassessing how offline and
20
online forms of surveillance are different, the boundaries of agreements between
institutions and technology companies, and the impact of surveillance on the social
contract between students and parents, and teachers and schools.
Data protection and privacy
In addressing data protection and privacy in relation to online learning, much work
has been done examining the impact of the digitisation of primary and secondary
schools. The ODI has examined the data about children’s lives in a pandemic.For
21
children, their families and teachers, data needs to be inclusive and represent the
needs of those with disadvantaged socio-economic status. The data needs to be
shared in a safe way to enable analyses to inform organisations, policymakers and
schools in their work with children, families and teachers. The project highlighted the
need to build a better data infrastructure within the education sector, and has
demonstrated how real-time, open, shared data can inform the response of schools
21
ODI (2020), ‘Data about children’s lives in the pandemic’.
20
Berkman Klein Center (2020), ‘Digital Ethics in Timesof Crisis: COVID-19 and Access to Education and
Learning Spaces’.
19
Williamson B, Hogan A (2021), ‘Pandemic Privitisationin Higher Education: Edtech & University Reform’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning26

and other organisations to the various challenges posed by the pandemic. Similarly,
an ODI report on data about teachers’ lives in a pandemic demonstrated that reliable,
systematic data on the wellbeing and professional views of teachers can support
better learning outcomes for teachers and students.
22
InThe State of Data 2020 reportDefend DigitalMenotes that the digitisation of
23
education can result in children losing their ability to control their online footprint once
they start school. Data protection alone may not be adequate and so the government
and policymakers should work to build better data infrastructures at national, regional
and local levels, and give it independent oversight through a statutory ombudsman to
champion children's rights for national data in education.
Focusing on the future of digital learning and teaching, JISC produced a report on the
response to Covid-19 based on over 1,000 stakeholder experiences.Looking at the
24
projected short-term and long-term inclusion of online learning, JISC have provided
recommendations for universities, sector agencies and government that include
strategic investment in digital learning and teaching, prioritising blended learning by
rethinking the scale and scope of learning and teaching activities with students, and
including digital training, peer support mechanisms and reward and recognition
incentives to encourage upskilling in professional development plans.
Models for the governance of online learning data
Digital technologies and platforms will remain in educational spaces even as physical
classrooms return. Therefore, educational institutions must plan for the blended
learning environment in the long term. This requires rethinking online education
pedagogies and data governance for online learning.
While it may seem logical to focus on the data for better data governance,
educational institutions should instead focus data governance strategies on the
impact on students and staff, improving teaching and learning experiences, and
sustaining data infrastructures to scale in the long run.To ensure that the academic
community’s privacy is respected, Borgmansuggeststhat:
25
●
Universities should focus on their core missions of teaching, research and
services to address priorities for data collection and stewardship through
accountability.
●
Whenever data is collected, the consequences on the individual and the
community should be considered. Only data that matters, not data that is
easy to gather, should be collected.
●
Joint data governance between faculty and administrators should be
considered.
●
Universities should promote awareness and transparency to maintain high
levels of public trust.
●
Patience and broad consultation of the use of data at institutions should be
prioritised.
25
Borgman CL (2018), ‘Open Data, Grey Data, and Stewardship:Universities at the Privacy Frontier’.
24
JISC (2021), ‘Learning and teaching reimagined: anew dawn for higher education?’.
23
Defend Digital Me (2020), ‘The State of Data 2020’.
22
ODI (2021), ‘Data about teachers’ lives during thepandemic’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning27

TheOffice for Students’ Gravity Assist report,whichcollected empirical evidence
26
during the pandemic, identified six components to successful digital teaching and
learning:
●Digital teaching must start with appropriately designed pedagogy, curriculum
and assessment.
●
Students must have access to the right digital infrastructure.
●
Good access enables staff and students to build the digital skills necessary
to engage.
●
Technology can then be harnessed strategically, rather than in a piecemeal or
reactive way, to drive educational experience and outcomes.
●
Inclusion for different student groups must be embedded from the outset.
●
All the elements need to be underpinned by a consistent strategy.
Ofstedhas produced a report on remote education researchin schools.The UK
27
Department for Education has also produced policy work on how technology can be
implemented to overcome barriers within education.This could be extended in light
28
of the pandemic and with greater consideration of data governance and data
infrastructure innovation.The EU has also consideredthe relationship between
emerging technologies and the teaching profession.That report emphasises that
29
emerging technologies and the datafication of education offer an opportunity to
rethink and re-frame success in education and training, encouraging the creation of
new practices to support effective learning in the future. The French data protection
authority CNIL has gone one step further, calling for French academic institutions to
reassess and consider alternatives to US-based collaborative toolson privacy
grounds, especially related to sensitive data such as research data or data relating to
minors. In response to Covid-19, the European Commission has established the
Digital Education Action Plan 2021-2027to addressthe impact of the pandemic on
education and its strategy for the long-term digital transformation of education and
training systems. The report identifies key enabling factors for effective digital
education and training:
●
connectivity and suitable digital equipment for learners and educators
●
teachers and trainers that are confident and skilled in using digital technology
to support their teaching and adapted pedagogy
●
leadership
●
collaboration and
●
the sharing of good practice and innovative teaching methods.
Applying existing research on online learning to potential policy solutions, data
management models can be applied to digital education to reveal new ways of work
that are privacy-friendly, secure and innovative. For example, theODI Data Ethics
Canvascan help identify ethical challenges for collectingcertain types of data and
implementing new technologies. The Data Ecosystem Mapping tool used in this
report can also be applied to specific institutions to help map out data governance
strategies based on institution-specific goals. Identifying the value of data from online
29
Vuorikari R, Punie Y, Cabrera Giraldez M (2020), ‘Emerging technologies and the teaching profession:
Ethical and pedagogical considerations based on near-future scenarios’.
28
UK Department for Education (2019), ‘Realising thepotential of technology in education’
27
Ofstead (2021), ‘Remote education research’
26
Office for Students (2021),‘Gravity assist: propellinghigher education towards a brighter future’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning28

learning, balanced with ethical decision-making, can support better cost-benefit
analysis when introducing new technologies, gathering new forms of data, and
implementing new ways of learning.
Beyond institutional decision-making, institutions should be aware of wider strategies
on data and data governance as applied to online learning. The UK government has
focused its effort on rebuilding the country’s education strategy, some of which is
powered by data. With theSkills and Post-16 EducationBill, the government aims to
ensure that higher education is up to date with the latest technological knowledge
and skills. TheOnline Safety Billmay place moreresponsibility on institutions to
govern data and content used for education. The UK may also take inspiration from
initiatives within the EU such as theGARR Consortiumin Italy, a national computer
network for universities and research with the aim to design and manage
high-performance network infrastructure that delivers advanced services to the
academic and scientific community. The Scottish government has also published ‘A
changing nation: how Scotland will thrive in a digital world’, a newdigital strategythat
aims to establish Scotland as an ethical digital nation and increase digital skills
through education.JISC, in its response to theNationalData Strategy Consultation,
suggests that a new national data infrastructure for research is needed for the benefit
of education and research, related to the organisation’sEducation 4.0targets for
2025. The UK Department for Education is also recruiting for aNo. 10 Innovation
Fellowto work specifically on harnessing the potentialof digital solutions in
education. As the government implements digital governance within public policy,
institutions can look to these strategies to support their short-term and long-term
data goals, mapping out the types of data their institutions are planning to collect,
what stakeholders need and what can help meet those needs, and whether new
technologies are necessary.
Gathering empirical data
Acknowledging that online learning and data governance strategies will look different
for different institutions, individual educational institutions may look to gather
stakeholder perspectives to identify the benefits and risks of online learning from their
own community.
In this section, based on existing research and proposed solutions, we suggest a set
of questions that provide a survey template that can be used by university
management to better understand how online learning has impacted the academic
experience of students and staff outside traditional feedback documents. Institutions
are encouraged to adapt the template to their needs and provide as much information
as possible on their data-related policies to better inform stakeholders of existing
online learning considerations.
Firstly, the beginning of the feedback form should include changes that the institution
or organisation has made when it comes to data governance and data protection
practices for online learning. This may vary across departments or schools within an
institution. Institutions may also wish to share their future plans for feedback. The
form should also include an introduction to explain key terms and help the
respondent understand what constitutes data in online learning. For example:
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning29

Introduction
Digital technologies are increasingly becoming a part of our everyday lives.
This includes the area of higher and further education, where students,
staff and academic institutions can use technologies and educational
platforms to deliver lessons, record classes and introduce new interactive
methods of learning.
This form aims to gather information about how different stakeholders
have experienced data being collected, used, managed and protected in
online learning. Data around online learning refers to quantitative or
qualitative information collected in a digital educational environment or
technology platform. This data can be about any stakeholders that engage
with online learning, such as students, teachers, researchers and parents.
Examples of data related to online learning include student information
collected so they can access digital educational tools, learning analytics
and tutorial recordings. Data that has been collected may also be used for
purposes other than delivering online learning, such as increasing the
quality of online learning platforms, repurposing recorded tutorials for
academic and non-academic use, and monitoring student and staff
engagement during sessions.
Next, the feedback should contextualise the role of the respondent to support better
understanding of their perspective. For example:
Stakeholder category
a.Student
b.Teaching staff
c.Research staff
d.School/university management
e.Technology company or platform
f.Education provider
g.Regulation and policy
h.Public or non-profit organisation
i.Other [free text]
2.How prepared were you or your organisation for online learning with
regards to data management and governance from March 2020(when
the first Covid-19 lockdown started)onwards?
a.Very prepared
b.Slightly prepared
c.Slightly unprepared
d.Very unprepared
3.If you are interested in our research findings, please leave your email
address and we will notify you of our final publication. This
information will not be used for other purposes:
a.[free text]
The main section of the feedback should focus on the specific impact of data
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning30

governance and data-related changes faced by the respondent. This could includes
questions such as:
Data governance questions
1.How prepared do you think your organisation was for online learning
with regards to data management and governance going into online
learning from March 2020 onwards?
a.Very prepared
b.Slightly prepared
c.Slightly unprepared
d.Very unprepared
2.Are you confident in your organisation’s ability to implement hybrid or
blended learning, including support for online learning data, for the
2021/22 academic year?
a.Very confident
b.Slightly confident
c.Slightly doubtful
d.Very doubtful
3.How satisfied are you about the changes (or lack thereof) that have
been implemented by your organisation in response to data
governance for online learning since March 2020?
a.Very satisfied
b.Slightly satisfied
c.Slightly unsatisfied
d.Very unsatisfied
Finally, the last part of the feedback form should be future-focused and encourage
free form reflections both on how changes have impacted the education experience
for the respondent, as well as what they hope to see in the long term:
The future of learning questions
1.In hindsight, what do you wish to have known regarding online
learning and how online learning data is used within your
organisation?
2.Is there anything that you wish was implemented from the start of
online learning?
3.What online learning practices would you like to continue to
implement in a blended learning environment?
4.What online learning practices would you like to continue to
implement when fully in-person learning returns?
By gathering direct feedback, institutions can better understand how the community
has responded to previous changes in policy and shape the future direction of data
governance and online learning within the organisation.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning31

Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning32

Discussion
Summary
After one year of online learning, and as the UK slowly transitions into blended
learning models for the upcoming 2021/22 academic year, it is clear that some of
these digital technologies and ways of learning will remain post-Covid. Technology
and blended learning have become thenew normal. Asa result, educational
institutions should rethink how they can better manage, protect and govern online
learning data and personal data to improve the online academic experience.
Limitations and caveats
The aim of this report was to provide insight and evidence on the data protection and
data-related concerns that students and staff may have over the course of online
learning during the pandemic. We acknowledge that during this time, students and
staff, as well as their institutions, have given their best efforts to continuing their
academic activities and responsibilities despite these challenging times. This report
aimed to illuminate the areas in which higher education institutions should consider
when developing data governance strategies for the future, not only in preparation for
future emergencies, but also to balance digital innovation in education with
maintaining student and staff autonomy over their personal data.
It should also be noted that as the Covid-19 pandemic continues in the UK and many
parts of the world during this report’s publication, more research needs to be done
and more evidence needs to be collected to better understand how the pandemic has
affected students, staff and academic institutions in the long term. This report has
highlighted some of the work that has been conducted on online learning prior to the
pandemic, as well as during some of these transitions.
Although the focus of this report is on online learning data and data governance, we
recognise other related challenges of online learning such as access to education and
online learning, internet connectivity, and socio-economic challenges that could
make online learning undesirable.
Further, this report focuses on higher education and may not be suitable for schools
and the governance of children’s online learning data. However, this report could
inform data considerations required in schools and colleges, where more caution
should be taken for children and young people.
As the authors of this document are based in the UK, the data protections regulated
within the UK may be different in other countries. While not all rights and privileges
may be granted outside of the UK and the EU, we encourage the careful
consideration of data governance for online learning globally to ensure that student
and staff personal data are better protected.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning33

Concluding remarks
In order to create an online learning strategy that is fit for the future of digital
education, university management should consider how online learning data ought to
be governed as part of their long-term strategy. This not only includes research data
but also student and staff personal data related to teaching, admin and data
processed by external platforms.
From an institutional perspective, when the implementation of innovative technologies
is supported by better data governance, a more dynamic and engaging academic
environment can be created for staff and students. This involves careful consideration
of what is and what isn’t necessary when it comes to online learning data. When
creating new data governance strategies, educational innovation and data protection
best practices go hand-in-hand, where good data management and forward-thinking
data infrastructure planning can make academic institutions more attractive and
create a better foundation for success.
Higher education institutions and university management need to better understand
how online learning has affected the university community, not only with regards to
teaching and learning, but also with the university experience. Universities should
explore different options when it comes to introducing new technologies, establishing
regular evaluations to ensure that the technologies that are implemented are fit for
purpose. With this in mind, policymakers should support institutions in making these
decisions, providing guidance on how online learning and education data should be
governed, as well as outlining the data infrastructure and data governance strategies
for the education sector as we continue to rely on hybrid education delivery for the
2021/22 academic year.
Looking ahead
Thinking beyond the pandemic and looking to thefutureof online learningin higher
education institutions, universities should reflect on the pandemic online learning
experience and update their long-term strategies onhow they want to deliver
academic contentand what they want theuniversityexperienceof the future to be.
This also requires support from education technology companies and policymakers in
considering funding data infrastructure across the education agenda. In order to
attract a more diverse and international body of staff and students, institutions should
focus on improving the academic experience beyond implementing technologies.
Having experienced a year of online learning from March 2020, students and staff
look to create meaningful relationships with the university community outside of the
classroom. This requires re-imagining the purpose of higher education and
considering how an institution’s values and aims can be carried forward both online
and offline.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning34

Resources list
Useful resources linked in the report for more
in-depth research and guidance.
Open Data Institute resources
Open Data Institute (2021), ‘Data Landscape Playbook’
Open Data Institute (2021), ‘Data Ethics Canvas2021’
Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data Ecosystem MappingTool’
COVID-19 online learning resources
Office for Students (2021), ‘Gravity assist: propellinghigher education
towards a brighter future.’
JISC (2021), ‘Learning and teaching reimagined: anew dawn for higher
education?’.
Edge Foundation (2020), ‘The impact of Covid-19 oneducation: A summary
of evidence on the early impacts of lockdown’.
Berkman Klein Center (2020), ‘Digital Ethics in Timesof Crisis: COVID-19 and
Access to Education and Learning Spaces’.
Vuorikari R, Punie Y, Cabrera Giraldez M (2020), ‘Emergingtechnologies and
the teaching profession: Ethical and pedagogical considerations based on
near-future scenarios’.
Other resources
Fiebig T, Gürses S, Gañán CH, Kotkamp E, Kuipers F, Lindorfer M, Prisse M,
Sari T (2021), ‘Heads in the Clouds: Measuring theImplications of
Universities Migrating to Public Clouds’.
Silverman S, Caines A, Casey C, de Hurtado BG, Riviere J, Sintjago A,
Vecchiola C (2021), ‘What Happens When You Close theDoor on Remote
Proctoring? Moving Toward Authentic Assessments with a People-Centered
Approach’.
Angiolini C, Ducato R, Giannopoulou A, Schneider G (2020), ‘Remote
Teaching During the Emergency and Beyond: Four Open Privacy and Data
Protection Issues of ‘Platformised’ Education’.
Borgman CL (2018), ‘Open Data, Grey Data, and Stewardship:Universities at
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning35

the Privacy Frontier’.
Open Data Institute 2021Data governance for online learning36