



Contents
About5
Acknowledgements5
Executive summary6
Introduction8
How we define public services9
Previous work on open data in public services9
Approach11
The public sector, and the policy areas it is responsible for, are complex11
The nature of data has changed, creating new possibilities12
Understanding the impacts of releasing open data12
Visualising public services as ecosystems12
Patterns of open data use in public service delivery15
The three patterns of open data for better delivery of public services15
Note on visualisations17
Pattern 1: open data for increasing access to public services17
Example 1a. Transport for London release of transport data18
Transport for London – in a nutshell19
How open data supports the delivery of Transport for London’s services:
benefits to the public sector19
Transport for London’s story19
Insights20
Example 1b. Leeds release of data in relation to bin collection22
Leeds Bins app – in nutshell22
How open data can support the delivery of waste management services:
benefits to the public sector22
Leeds Bins app’s story22
Insights23
Example 1c. Famiio improving access to childcare and family service information25
Famiio – in a nutshell25
How open data can support childcare and family services:
benefits to the public sector25
Famiio’s story25
Insights26
Pattern 2: open data for more efficient delivery chains and planning27
Example 2a. Local authority publication of spend data28
Spend Network – in a nutshell29
How open data supports the delivery of local public services:
benefits to the public sector29
Spend Network’s story29
Insights30
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             2

Example 2b. NHS publication of open data31
NHS open data – in a nutshell31
How open data can support the delivery of health services:
benefits to the public sector31
NHS open data story31
Insights31
Example 2c. Urban Intelligence publishing local planning information33
Urban Intelligence – in a nutshell33
How open data can support the delivery of urban planning services:
benefits to the public sector33
Urban Intelligence’s story33
Insights33
Pattern 3 – Open data for policy development35
Example 3a. The Department for Work and Pensions development of Churchill36
Churchill – in a nutshell37
How open data can support the delivery of DWP services:
benefits to the public sector37
DWP Churchill’s story37
Insights39
Example 3b. Cabinet Office release of government grants data40
Government Grants Information System – in a nutshell41
How open data can support the delivery of grant-funded public services:
benefits to the public sector41
Government Grants Information System’s story41
Insights42
Insights from examples43
Organisational collaboration43
Technology infrastructure, digital skills and literacy43
Foundational data infrastructure43
Open standards for data44
Senior-level championing44
Peer networks44
Intermediaries45
Problem focus45
Open innovation45
Recommendations47
Organisational collaboration47
Central government recommendation: fund public sector organisations
to experiment with using open data to support the delivery of public services47
Technology infrastructure, digital skills and literacy47
Central government recommendation: train public sector staff how to use
open data in public sector delivery48
Data infrastructure48
Open standards for data48
Senior-level championing48
Peer networks48
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             3

Intermediaries48
Problem focus49
Next steps50
Learning materials50
Stimulus Fund50
Method51
About
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and
published in February 2018 as part of its project on using open data to deliver public
services. Its authors were Ed Parkes, Therese Karger-Lerchl, Peter Wells, Jack Hardinges
and Roza Vasileva. If you want to share feedback by email, develop the thinking in your
national context, or would like to get in touch, contact the team atrandd@theodi.org.
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click the
‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page.
The report is part of a wider project on new service delivery models, which aims to
improve understanding of how to implement data-enabled service delivery models in
government, and how to publish more open data as part of these approaches.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Emma Doyle, Gary Todd, Ian Makgill, Rikesh Shah, Ryan Dunn,
Thom Townsend, Tom Forth, Yeonhwa Lee and their teams for the interviews and
workshops, which were essential for this research and report.
Pia Waugh, Paul Maltby, Professor Lucy Kimbell, Leigh Dodds, Bill Roberts, Louise
Downe and Martin Jordan also contributed to discussions that helped to define our
approach. We ran two workshops at Local Gov Camp 2017 and UKGovCamp 2018 and
received many helpful contributions from participants.
This is work in progress. It is likely to be updated as we
continue our work. Keep an eye out for updates!
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from
the community in the comments.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             4

Executive summary
This paper explores how open data can be used in public service
delivery and its potential for collaboration, joint problem-solving and
open innovation. It highlights where open data has been released by
public sector institutions and its effects on delivering public services
The nature of the public sector is complex, as are the policy areas it is responsible for.
At the same time, there are new possibilities presented by the changing nature of data.
This paper encapsulates the ODI’s research into different ways of understanding the
impacts of releasing open data for public services while capturing the complexity of
delivering public services.
We visualised open data within an ecosystem to identify open data opportunities in the
public sector. By taking this approach, we developed three high-level patterns of open
data use in public services.
High-level patterns of open data use:
●Pattern 1uses open data to increase access to servicesfor
citizens or organisations
●Pattern 2uses open data to plan public service deliveryand
make service delivery chains more efficient; direct beneficiaries
are commissioners, managers and frontline public service
workers
●Pattern 3uses open data to inform policymaking; direct
beneficiaries are elected representatives, policymakers and
citizens who want to influence policy
We identify examples of each pattern and draw insights from their similarities.
So far, we have developed practical recommendations for a range of actors to support
greater use of open data to deliver public services.
Practical recommendations for greater use of open
data in public services focus on:
●Organisational collaboration
●Technology infrastructure, digital skills and literacy
●Data infrastructure
●Open standards for data
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             5

●Senior level championing
●Peer networks
●Intermediaries
●Problem focus
We will develop the methodology behind this report further as part of our wider project
on new service delivery models, in which we are supporting four local areas in the UK to
redesign a public serviceusing open data.
We will use our insights to develop learning materials to support those in the public
sector to better use open data to deliver public services.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             6

Introduction
Many public services in the UK are expected to deliver efficiency
savings along with improved outcomes for citizens. At the same time,
public service delivery is increasingly interconnected with many
organisations from the public, private and charitable sectors. To
ensure effective and efficient delivery, we need to understand these
links and interdependencies.
Data is moving from being scarce and difficult to process to being abundant and
easy to use. There are increasing opportunities to harness its value for economic
and social benefit. Open data isdata that anyonecan access, use or share.
It drives innovation by and for government, individuals, businesses, startups
and communities.
We can see open data’s potential for transparency, economic growth and
productivity ininternational open data for accountabilityinitiatives,open data
1
startupsandbusinesses improving processes with opendata.
This paper describes how open data is used to deliver public services and the
effects it has. We suggest a framework for understanding these impacts and set
out ways in which others – from the public sector and beyond – can help
develop this understanding.
As part of its broader research project, the ODI is supportingfour local areas in
the UK to redesign a public service using open data:Doncaster Metropolitan
Borough Council, Kent County Council, North Lanarkshire Council and the
London Borough of Waltham Forest.We opened an invitationto tender in
2
summer 2017 and received 24 applications from consortia in the UK, ranging
from community policing to public health, arts and culture. The responses
demonstrated an appetite to innovate with open data in public service delivery.
By engaging with teams going through service transformation, we hope to test
some of the insights in this paper and develop our understanding of effective
service patterns using open data.
We are also analysing learning resources available to those in the public sector
who design and deliver public services, to help them use open data to support
their service.
2
ODI (2017), ‘Four UK teams win funding to redesign public services with open data’,
https://theodi.org/blog/four-uk-teams-win-funding-to-redesign-public-services-with-ope
n-data
1
Open Government Partnership (n.d.), ‘Stories’,
https://www.opengovpartnership.org/stories?country=0&type=0&theme=1196
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             7

While open data can support a variety of public services around the world, the
scope of this report is limited to UK examples. This is because our methodology
requires us to engage closely with those working in the public sector to
understand the ecosystems they operate in. We will incorporate examples from
other countries in future work.
How we define public services
We developed a working definition of a public service early on. This helped us to
identify examples to examine in more detail. The definition is:
“
A public service helps groups of people to fulfil a need,
the
 
fulfilment of which is viewed to be in the public
interest, and which public sector organisations recognise
the need to provide.
We settled on this definition for several reasons. We wanted to recognise a
definition of public service which was as broad as possible, so we could capture
the wider effects of open data, ie where data collected and published in one part
of the system was used by another part of the system at another place and time.
Our current definition focuses on the needs that individuals or groups of people
have, as suggested by Cassie Robinson,as we didnot want to align our
3
definition too closely to the legal responsibilities that public sector organisations
have. We wanted to recognise that – particularly in relation to services that rely
on external organisations for their delivery and are not necessarily totally funded
by government – there would not always be a distinct legal requirement for
provision to a particular group.
This definition is evolving and we will refine it further to make it more succinct.
Previous work on open data in public services
During our research we identified blog posts, reports and previous analyses on
the use of open data in public services. There is quite a wide literature on the use
of data in central and local governmentand the impactsof open data on
4
4
Nesta (2016), ‘Wise Council: insights from the cutting edge of data-driven local
government’,
https://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/wise-council-insights-cutting-edge-data-driven-lo
cal-government
3
Cassie Robinson (2017), ‘Putting users first is not the answer to everything’,
https://medium.com/doteveryone/putting-users-first-is-not-the-answer-to-everything-dd
05b9f11b5
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             8

economic growth and innovation,but a relatively limited range specifically on
5
open data and public services.
This is a brief summary of those publications specifically relevant to the impacts
of open data on public service delivery.
Pia Waugh, who has worked for both the Australian and New Zealand
governments, has outlined some effects of open data on public services in a
number of blog posts and presentations, including this summary:
6
i) Efficiency
Proactively publishing data that is commonly asked for in an automated
way frees up resources.
ii) Innovation
Once data is published, so long as it is published well and kept up to
date, other people and organisations will use the data to create new
information, analysis and services. This innovation can be adopted by the
agency, but it also takes the pressure off the agency to deliver all things
to all people, by enabling others to scratch their own itch.
ii) Improved services
By publishing data in a programmatically accessible way, agencies found
cheaper and  more modular service delivery was possible through
reusable data sources. Open data is often the first step for agencies on
the path to more modular and API driven way of doing things (which the
private sector embraced a decade ago). I believe if we could get
government data, content and services API enabled by default, we would
see dramatically cheaper and better services across all governments, with
the opportunity for a public ecosystem of cross jurisdictional service and
information delivery to emerge.
In the UK,the ODI’s work with the Environment Agencyhas captured the
7
benefits of releasing open data since the Environment Agency made their
organisation-wide commitment in 2010.
The impacts the Environment Agency identified at
that point were:
●Helping the Environment Agency to achieve its core objective
●Saving time and resources
●Building external relationships and getting the user-voice heard
●Improving data quality and public perception
7
ODI (n.d.), ‘Benefits for EA’,https://theodi.org/ea-going-open-benefits-for-ea
6
Pia Waugh (2016), ‘Finding the natural motivation for change’,
http://pipka.org/2016/02/21/finding-the-natural-motivation-for-change
5
ThisGoogle Doccontains links to papers on the economicpotential of open data.
This
 
is not an exhaustive list but includes reports we considered during this project.
Pleaseget in touchif we missed any.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             9

●Better understanding and managing risks around data use and
publication
●Bringing diverse teams together
●Working more easily and efficiently with external partners
●Harnessing the power of the tech industry to make useful
applications
Another sector-focused study by GovLab examined the opportunity for open
data use in the UK’s National Health Service (NHS) in 2014.Along with
8
exploring potential impacts of open data on the system, it set out a conceptual
framework which could be used to help measure the impact of open data in the
NHS.
The report set out a logic model for open data in the NHS, described as:
“The use of certain kinds of inputs and data, by certain kinds of users, for certain
kinds of activities, will achieve certain outputs and outcomes that indicate
impact. Specific methodologies will be used to collect and measure indicators,
helping to assess impact.”
The report also made recommendations for taking the agenda forward in the
NHS, including to “develop an open health data ecology map, possibly using
crowdsourcing, with a dictionary of all open health datasets used along with
the variety of uses and users.”
In summary, these previous pieces of work have begun to explore impact areas
experienced by the public sector in releasing open data. Our work will expand
on this by identifying particular examples and their shared characteristics so we
can study in more detail how the release of open data will make public service
delivery better.
Approach
From the ODI’s experience working with partners across multiple sectors –
national and international, public and private – we have developed an
understanding of how to build value on top of data.
Value can be drawn from organisations that steward data (whether collecting,
maintaining or sharing it), those that build data services, and those that use data
and data services to make decisions.
8
GOVLAB (2014), ‘The open data era in health and social care’,
http://www.thegovlab.org/static/files/publications/nhs-full-report.pdf
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             10

The public sector, and the policy areas it is responsible for,
are complex
To understand how open data could be used in the public sector, we first need
to understand public service delivery. Modern public services are complex and
include an ecosystem of actors and organisations with different roles
and responsibilities.
There are various groups in the public service delivery system. This is especially
true now that parts of the public sector are increasingly using organisations like
outsourced contractors and charities to help deliver services.
Meanwhile, there are more and different ways of funding these services –
eg social impact bonds and other forms of social investment – which makes the
picture of public service delivery complicated. Different parts of government
have unique powers for tax raising, regulation and distribution of public funds.
Add democratic oversight at a number of levels, such as central and local
government, and this picture becomes more complicated still.
In addition, public sector organisations are themselves facing complex issues.
Childhood obesity, workforce planning, crime prevention and many other policy
issues have different origins, and effective interventions are multifaceted and
need a long-term approach and collaboration.
To explain the relationships that support government service delivery, our
approach must allow for complexities and interaction between those involved.
The nature of data has changed, creating new possibilities
Data is moving from being scarce and difficult to process to being abundant and
easy to use. But harnessing its value for economic and social benefit – in ways
that support innovation and deliver social justice – is hard.
Data can enable us to innovate, create more efficient and effective services and
products, and fuel economic growth and productivity. To bring about this future,
we must make data as open as possible while protecting people’s privacy,
commercial confidentiality and national security. We need to find the right
balance for all societies and economies to feel data’s benefits fairly.
This report is focused on open data. We have to start somewhere. We will
expand our thinking about opportunities for public service delivery to include
other ways of sharing data in the future.
Open data offers a way of creating social and economic value from data in a
changing environment. Open data is data that anyone can access, use or share.
Anyone can use it as a resource for innovation. When data is published openly,
others can use it and create value from it. We currently know less about creating
value from open data than from historic methods of collecting and selling data.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             11

A good understanding of data ecosystems and the benefits that open data
creates in them can help to identify how value is created.
By making data openly available while respecting privacy, the public sector can
create a resource for external innovation and build ecosystems to help deliver
public services. Those ecosystems will include public sector organisations,
businesses, startups, individuals and communities.
Understanding the impacts of releasing open data
The ODI has been focusing on understanding the impacts of releasing open data
for public services, while capturing the complexity of public service delivery.
To enable the public sector to understand how open data can support public
service delivery, we have looked for ways to make the mechanisms clearer and
easier to experiment with.
Visualising public services as ecosystems
Because public service delivery is complex and processes are not linear,
identifying impacts and beneficiaries is not straightforward. Impacts may not be
easily understood, or may be indirect and take time to materialise. Visualising a
public service as an ecosystem allows us to identify and be explicit about the
impacts and who is affected, and helps us to understand the different types of
value exchanged within networks of data publishers and users. We can then
explain these impacts more clearly to the public sector and data holders,
encouraging further release and use of open data.
Visualisation brings sense to complex systems and issues across business and
government. Government departments have created visualisations of
ecosystems to help convey the overarching strategy and vision for an
organisation.Maps of business processes and datacollection help
9
understanding of opportunities in government data collection.
10
Visualising and drawing are core approaches inservicedesignand theUK
Cabinet Office Policy Laband academics such as LucyKimbell have pushed
their use forward in a government context. Kimbell has provided a number of
useful approaches to thinking about service design in the public sector and her
methodologies have inspired the way in which we have conducted research for
this project.
11
11
Lucy Kimbell (2015), ‘Service Innovation Handbook’,
https://serviceinnovationhandbook.org
10
Michael Rose (2010), ‘The complications of a right to data’,
https://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/key/hqYlWFPoX4yLbf?lipi=urn%3Ali
%3Apage%3Ad_flagship3_profile_view_base_treasury%3B%2BUJNc%2BWdQT6UkBD
N9gziRQ%3D%3D
9
DWP Digital (2015), DWP’s 2020 Vision,
https://dwpdigital.blog.gov.uk/2015/03/18/dwp-2020-vision-andrew-besford
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             12

Visualising service innovation ecosystems by showing how people, data, resources,
firms and institutions are connected together now, or could be in the future.
12
In relation to open data specifically, members of the open data community also
use visualisation of ecosystems.ODI Head of DataInfrastructure Leigh Dodds
13
has been experimenting with ecosystem diagrams for open data as a way of
exploring its effects.
14
14
Lost Boy (2017), ‘Some tips for open data ecosystem mapping’,
https://blog.ldodds.com/2017/03/13/some-tips-for-open-data-ecosystem-mapping
13
See:http://www.jargonautical.com
12
A method used in Kimbell, L. (2014).Service InnovationHandbook. Amsterdam: BIS
Publishers. Illustration: Andrew Boag
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             13

There are a number of academic disciplines that visualise ecosystems and
networks to bring insight to complex systems. In particular, asoft-systems
methodologyapproach can be helpful in capturing people’sinvolvement in a
system. Soft systems methodology is an approach to business-process
modelling which is useful for general problem-solving and managing change.
The system was developed to deal with “soft problems” – those where there are
divergent views and where organisations and people are key parts – with lots of
similarities with public sector systems. In addition, value network analysisuses
visualisation to understand complex economic systems.
In our research, we experimented with a technique from soft-systems
methodology calledrich picturing. When exploringan issue, we ran workshops
with public sector groups working with open data, to visualise the relationships
between organisations, technologies and datasets.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             14

Patterns of open data use in
public service delivery
The following examples and analysis are our first attempt to describe
specific impacts of open data on public service delivery. We are
seeking input from within government and the broader open data
community to help us identify and describe these impacts further.
Those within the public sector are best placed to highlight the impacts of open
data on public service delivery, and in many ways are the only ones able to
describe them in detail. In many cases, there is a lack of transparency in the
operation of public sector organisations. We need a detailed understanding of
how services operate to begin to understand what effect data – open data in
particular – has on the system.
Following our initial research and interviews with experts, we identified examples
to investigate in detail using our visualisation methodology. Given that we
needed to engage with those working in the public sector in detail to understand
the dynamics of public service delivery, we had to confine our analysis to UK
examples for the time being.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             15

The three patterns of open data for better delivery
of public services
We propose that open data can be used in the public sector to help deliver
services in three ways. We call these “patterns” and have used them to group
the examples in this work.
The figure above shows that the patterns occur at different points of public
service delivery, moving from direct impacts for the user (on the left) towards
indirect impacts through better delivery and policymaking (on the right).
High-level patterns of open data use:
●Pattern 1uses open data to increase access to servicesfor
citizens or organisations
●Pattern 2uses open data to plan public service deliveryand
make service delivery chains more efficient; direct
beneficiaries
 
are commissioners, managers and frontline
public
 
service
 
workers
●Pattern 3uses open data to inform policy-making;direct
beneficiaries are elected representatives, policy-makers and
citizens who want to influence policy
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             16

The graphic shows how these patterns vary in terms of direct beneficiaries, and
that we think they differ in the types of open data currently released and used.
For instance, in Pattern 1 we find more examples of rapidly changing data being
used – such as that released by Transport for London (TfL) – than in those
patterns targeted at civil servants (Pattern 3).
Impact is not limited to direct beneficiaries. It can extend to many, if not all,
of those who deliver and receive public services. This report focuses on the
benefits generated from open data. We recognise that open data can also create
risks or feedback loops that have negative impacts and that potential outcomes
should be carefully assessed on a case-by-case basis.
The following sections look at the dynamics of the patterns in more detail.
In presenting the ecosystems, we also explain how each was developed.
This offers insight into how these arrangements came to be, and highlights
important aspects of how open data supports particular services that are not
obvious when looking at the ecosystem drawings in a fixed state.
Note on visualisations
The ecosystem maps were initially drawn in workshops with those involved in
delivering the service; we then redrew them and structured them according to
the types of data, information produced and direct beneficiaries (as in the
diagram above). Finally an illustrator,Ian Dutnall,designed some of the maps to
bring out the actors and processes more clearly. Examples below have
ecosystem maps across these stages attached to them, including
hand-drawings and designed pictures, to showcase the methodology. Some of
the ecosystem maps that we present are those we have developed with an
illustrator, some are the drawings from the workshops and in some instances we
have not presented ecosystem maps, as further work to understand the
ecosystem is needed.
Pattern 1: open data for increasing access to public
services
The first is perhaps the most well-rehearsed pattern, since it clearly sets out an
open data “startup” story – where organisations delivering public services can
release data and a startup can take it to develop a product or service. These
examples tend to be of customer-focused and in-person public services.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             17

Example 1a. Transport for London release of transport data
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             18

Transport for London – in a nutshell
Transport for London (TfL) is a local government body responsible for the
transport system in Greater London. TfL has the responsibility for London's
network of principal road routes, for various rail networks including the London
Underground, London Overground, Docklands Light Railway and TfL Rail, for
London's trams, buses and taxis, for cycling provision, and for river services.
How open data supports the delivery of Transport for London’s
services: benefits to the public sector
TfL is one of the UK’s leading open data publishers. With over 31 million
journeys made in London every day,it has long recognisedthe need to make
15
travel information readily available to passengers. Publishing open data is a
central part of TfL's customer information strategy of providing real-time
information that helps people to use their services – it enables them to provide
information about service locations, routes and delays to passengers far beyond
their own online and offline channels.
Transport for London’s story
Towards the end of the 2000s, TfL found that developers were scraping
information about its services from its website. In an attempt to enable others
to more easily display this information on their own websites and desktops, TfL
launched embeddable widgets – including maps of its network and live travel
news – in 2007. While TfL still makes a set of widgets available,the launch
16
represented the beginning of a process in which the organisation would publish
increasing amounts of data for others to access, use and share.
Between 2007 and 2011, TfL introduced an area for developers on its website
and openly published real-time transit data via a range of feeds and downloads.
This helped to satisfy a growing demand for itsdata among developers, who
17
used it to develop user-facing journey planners and other applications. The
anticipated influx of visitors to London during the 2012 Olympic Games was a
stimulus for the introduction of live bus arrivals data, which led to a number of
successful bus-only transport applications. Shortly after this came the launch
of a new unified Application Programming Interface (API) for TfL’s website.
The development of TfL’s unified API in 2014 and the decision to open it up to
external users was an important step in the organisation’s open data journey.
18
Historically, the data it had published on different transport modes was made
available in a variety of formats and structures, which made it difficult for
developers to stitch together and develop multimodal applications (such as
18
See:
https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/open-data-users/unified-api?intcmp=29422#on-this-page-0
17
TfL also publishes open data related to transparency and accountability, such as
details of its expenditure; this case study focuses on the organisation’s transit data.
16
Transport for London (n.d.), ‘Widgets’,https://tfl.gov.uk/forms/12425.aspx
15
Transport for London (n.d.), ‘What we do’,
https://tfl.gov.uk/corporate/about-tfl/what-we-do
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             19

those that enable users to plan a journey using both buses and the London
Underground). The unified API presented the data in common formats (XML and
JSON) and, for the first time, consistent structures.
TfL’s open data now covers timetables, routes and lines, embarkation points and
facilities, transit status, disruptions and works, and fares.According to recent
19
research by Deloitte,in total there are over 80TfL data feeds (75% of which are
20
available via the unified API) and over 13,000 registered developers.Data users
21
range from multinational technology companies to individual developers. The
research has shown that TfL’s approach to open data is improving journeys,
saving people time, supporting innovation and creating jobs.
According to the Deloitte research, TfL open data is now used in over 600 apps
(including journey planners, mapping tools, booking and scheduling tools, and
analytics engines).42% of Londoners use an app poweredby TfL data and
22
passengers benefit from between £70m and £90m per year in time saved from
using open data-powered applications to plan journeys more accurately. Up to
£20m additional revenue is generated from increased journeys per year, driven
by access to travel information, and £1m is saved per year by enabling external
development of new customer-facing apps, rather than producing campaigns,
systems and apps in-house. TfL save £2m annually by moving away from SMS
passenger alerts and TfL open data currently supports 730 jobs, including those
in new companies made viable through its availability.
Insights
Clearly describing the benefits of open data in relation to TfL’s wider
organisational objectives has established a strong, ongoing case for its
publication.Providing accurate and timely informationto passengers is central to
TfL’s ability to deliver its physical services – open data enables developers and
other organisations to develop customer-facing tools that do this on a scale that
TfL could not do alone. Efforts to establish the value of the benefits of TfL’s open
data approach include the Shakespeare Review,whichdocumented the
23
approach in a case study in 2013, and the Deloitte research commissioned by
TfL that has estimated the total value of open data to the organisation,
customers and others to be in the order of £130m per year.
24
24
See Deloitte (2017), ‘Assessing the value of TfL’s open data and digital partnerships’,
http://content.tfl.gov.uk/deloitte-report-tfl-open-data.pdf(p 5)
23
Gov.uk (2013), ‘Shakespeare review of public sector information’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/shakespeare-review-of-public-sector-infor
mation
22
See Deloitte (2017), ‘Assessing the value of TfL’s open data and digital partnerships’,
http://content.tfl.gov.uk/deloitte-report-tfl-open-data.pdf(pp 5, 9, 15)
21
Note that TfL still supports the use of some data feeds and bulk downloads that
preceded its unified API. In some cases, these contain additional data not yet available
via the unified API.
20
Deloitte (2017), ‘Assessing the value of TfL’s open data and digital partnerships’,
http://content.tfl.gov.uk/deloitte-report-tfl-open-data.pdf
19
TfL Website (n.d.), ‘Our open data’,
https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/open-data-users/our-open-data?intcmp=3671
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             20

Engaging with developers and other users has helped to build a vibrant
ecosystem around TfL’s open data. Having begun with creating an area
dedicated to developers on its website in 2007, TfL continues to engage with
and provide support to users of its open data through hackathons, blog posts
on its website, and other channels. In 2017 it launched the TfL Tech Forum and
also ran a consultation focused on understanding how it could improve its
open data publication.
Publishing open data has supported conversations and partnerships between
TfL and other organisations who hold valuable transit data. By making data
available to others, TfL has benefited from engagement with companies such
as Waze, Apple and Citymapper – some of which provide TfL with access to the
data they collect. This includes data related to transport modes and areas for
which it does not itself collect data (eg crowdsourced traffic incident data),
giving TfL access to a rich source of data enabling them to better manage traffic
in London than it otherwise could.
A number of intermediary users combine TfL open data with data from other
sources to create their own products and services. Organisations like ITO World,
TransportAPI, Tom Tom and Elgin gather data from different sources to provide
aggregated data feeds and additional services to developers and other
organisations. This type of use demonstrates the need for transport data
standards that allow interoperability – part of the value currently added by these
intermediary users is to harmonise the data published by different transport
operators and other organisations to make it easier to use and to develop new
products and services.
25
As well as using open data published by TfL to increase access to the
organisation’s physical transport network, some users are developing their own
transport services. For example, CityMapper helps users make decisions about
how to get from A to B in London using different modes of transport, which are
managed and run by providers including TfL, Uber and Arriva. In 2017,
CityMapper trialled the SmartBus, which uses data it collects on how users of
its service move around the city to create the routes and timetables for the new
SmartBus service.
25
The ODI is currently working with a wide range of stakeholders to support the
development of open data standards. This includes producing a case study focused on
the General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS), which is a widely adopted standard for
public transportation data.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             21

Example 1b. Leeds release of data in relation to bin collection
Leeds Bins app – in nutshell
The Leeds Bins app is a mobile application that tells people who live in Leeds
when their green, brown and black bins are due to be collected, and adds
reminders to their calendars. The diagram above is an example of a
work-in-progress version of an ecosystem map, displaying the actors involved
in the service delivery.
How open data can support the delivery of waste management
services: benefits to the public sector
Open data on bin collection routes and times is used to inform people living in
Leeds when their bins are collected. The application adds bin collection dates
to people’s calendars, reminds them the night before to put out their bin, and
includes links to what to put in which bin and where to take items that cannot be
put into bins. The reminders make rubbish collection more convenient for
citizens, and publishing open data – instead of sending out letters – saves the
council approximately £100,000 per year based on estimations by imactivate.
Leeds Bins app’s story
Leeds has long seen open data as a means of supporting local economic growth
while dealing with substantial reductions in local government spending power. In
2014, Leeds Council decided to invest significantly in making open data work for
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             22

the city. Leeds has a lot of digital talent and city leadership saw potential to
showcase the city’s strengths to potential investors.
In setting out the open data initiative, the council asked city departments what
challenges they faced to consider how open data could help. The council
assigned funding to encourage the release and use of open data to solve city
challenges. TheUrban Sustainable Development Labwas one the programmes
funded. An innovation lab was set up to generate ideas and pilot them. Some of
the funding for this came from the UK’s national “Release of data” fund with
extra local funding boosting this.
26
Leeds’ open data platformData Mill Northhosted anevent atODI Leeds, an ODI
Node, with developers working with council departments – including office staff,
frontline workers, and sometimes elected members – to consider how open data
could be used for better service delivery. People working in waste management
shared the problems they faced in their work, one being that people did not
know when their bins were collected and were unhappy with the service as a
result, and that the council had to mail out bin collection timetables either
annually or twice-yearly, an expense that they increasingly could not afford.
Data was made available for the event and developers built prototypes to
address the identified problems.imactivate, a smallsoftware company in
Leeds and partner organisations of ODI Leeds, developed a Leeds Bins
prototype, initially as a website. This idea and three others from the other teams
of developers were presented to the waste management department. A winner
was selected and the Leeds Bins team got the funding to develop what later
became a mobile application, due to the difficulty and cost of updating
Leeds City Council’s website.
Bartec Auto IDmanage the bin routes in Leeds andhave software that manages
their bin routes and sends and receives live updates. Data Mill North worked
with Bartec Auto ID to release household bin collection data openly, and the
council included the open release of the bin collection schedule in its contract
with Bartec Auto ID.DCLG (now MHCLG) had previouslydeveloped a standard
27
for publishing bin collection routing data with Bartec Auto ID, and other
stakeholders, in theirLocal Waste Service StandardsProjectThat standard was
used for this project. Imactivate developed theLeedsBins mobile application
using the open bin route data. Uptake of the application has been fast and
widespread, data on which is published openly.
28
The council uses open data on app usage to identify areas of low uptake, and
has launched targeted initiatives to increase awareness of the application and/or
promote other ways of informing people when their bins are collected, to reduce
the risk of people without smartphones not receiving information about
collection times. These targeted initiatives are more cost-effective than regular
28
Data Mill North (n.d.), ‘Leeds Bins app record of lookups’,
https://datamillnorth.org/dataset/leeds-bins-app-record-of-lookups
27
Data Mill North (n.d.), ‘Household waste collections‘,
https://datamillnorth.org/dataset/household-waste-collections
26
Data.gov.uk (2014), ‘Release of Data Fund Update’,
https://data.gov.uk/blog/release-data-fund-update
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             23

mail-outs. The open data on uptake allowed Leeds City Council to choose which
channels to prioritise. This decision is difficult because it involves weighing up
needs and costs. Data can inform these decisions but the council ultimately
needs to make them democratically.
Insights
Starting with the problem, in this case people not knowing when to put out
which bin, and working closely with the local authority on solving it with open
data, has proven helpful in delivering a better public service. The ongoing cost
to Leeds City Council for this solution is about £1,500 per year, significantly
lower than mail-out costs.imactivate and BartechAuto ID are now selling the
29
app to other councils, powered by open data where possible and by direct
data-sharing between imactivate and Bartech Auto ID where open data is not
preferred by the local government, or where opening the data adds
unacceptable costs (eg PAF licensing).
29
Numbers are based on estimations by imactivate.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             24

Example 1c. Famiio improving access to childcare and family service
information
Famiio – in a nutshell
Famiiois planning to provide a platform for informationon childcare and family
services. Information on the platform will be available to the public, professionals
and local and central government. Parents will be able to search and discover
more than 500,000 services and activities across local authority borders in
England; service providers will be able to promote their service offer effectively
in one place; local authorities and commissioners will have access to better data
more easily and cost-effectively, which in turn will help them to manage the
childcare market and deliver “smart commissioning” of services.
How open data can support childcare and family services: benefits to
the public sector
The UK Department for Education found that information about available
services plays an important role in uptake of childcare by parents.The variety
30
of services available and the number of different service providers can make it
difficult for parents to understand what services they can use. Once launched,
Famiio will improve access to the right services for families that need them.
Local authorities will be better able to direct citizens to the right service by
providing help better and earlier through Family Information Services and by
targeting services.
In addition to providing information on available services to parents, the platform
will also publish this information openly, to be reused by commissioners for gap
analyses, to assist grant awards, and to be used by third parties. Famiio has the
potential to help local authorities save costs in their internal information systems
as information will be more readily available and it may become easier to match
families’ needs with the existing services.
For parents not able to or interested in using the Famiio interface, Family
Information Services will be able to use the application and continue to provide
more traditional support to parents. (This highlights the need for infomediaries
that produce non-digital information.)
Famiio’s story
Most local authorities have a Family Information Service that provides
information to parents about childcare and family services, the provision of
which is a statutory responsibility of local authorities under the Childcare Bill
2016. In 2008, the government initiated a project to aggregate information
on all services available to families, including services not commissioned by
local authorities.
30
Department for Education (2016), ‘Childcare and early years survey of parents 2014 to
2015’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/516924/
SFR09-2016_Childcare_and_Early_Years_Parents_Survey_2014-15_report.pdf.pdf
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             25

This information was shared publicly, but not as open data. In 2012, this system
was closed down under austerity measures.
Famiio was conceived to help parents access services across borders between
local authorities and to protect family information from the uncertainty of
government funding.
Statutory guidance for local authorities from the Department of Education
specifies how local authorities should share information on childcare and family
services, and suggests that as far as is reasonably practicable, data should be
published in a reusable and machine-readable format based on open standards.
31
Local authorities will be able to use the Famiio platform to meet this guidance
and, once the data is aggregated into the platform, parents will be able to
access it free of charge, while local authorities and service providers will pay
a subscription fee.
Insights
Funding is an essential part of an open data project. The potential of Famiio for
better childcare and family services can only be realised once the organisation
receives funding. Access to funding may be particularly difficult for organisations
outside of government.
31
Department for Education (2017), ‘Early education and childcare. Statutory guidance
for local authorities’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/596460/
early_education_and_childcare_statutory_guidance_2017.pdf
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             26

Pattern 2: open data for more efficient delivery
chains and planning
In this second pattern, we identify examples of open data release supporting
planning and delivery. The direct beneficiaries are likely to be those in public
sector organisations commissioning services and those in external organisations
involved in service delivery.
These examples highlight the role open data can play in better coordination
between the public and private or third sector organisations involved and making
the delivery of public services more effective and efficient.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             27

Example 2a. Local authority publication of spend data
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             28

Spend Network – in a nutshell
Spend Networkpulls together spending, contract andtender data published
by local authorities and other organisations in the UK. The organisation then
provides insight and consultancy services to potential service providers to public
sector organisations, and provides similar services back to government.
How open data supports the delivery of local public services:
benefits to the public sector
Open data published by government organisations is analysed and repurposed
by Spend Network to provide analysis, which will help make delivery chains and
relationships between suppliers and buyers more efficient. The same (closed)
data is used to save public money and improve the quality of services delivered
to citizens.
Spend Network’s story
Inspired byWindsor and Maidenhead Council– whichhad started to release
details of their spending in 2008 – the UK government, as part of the
transparency drive in the previous coalition government, set out expectations
32
of the spend and transparency data it needed UK local authorities to publish.
33
For instance, this set out that all UK Local Authorities had to publish all spending
transactions over £500 and all Government Procurement Card spending and
contracts valued over £5,000. The policy motivation for these commitments was
to ensure that taxpayers could have insight into how public authorities were
spending money.
Supported by guidance produced by the Local Government Association,
34
some local governments began to publish this data in open formats. In addition
to spending data, data on let contracts was also made available.
The councils were required to publish the data on their websites. Spend Network
began to pick up the data and aggregate it across many different UK local
authorities. Spend Network was launched in November 2013 using open data to
create the first comprehensive and publicly available repository for government
transaction data, a market worth in excess of £130b per annum. Spend Network
has published over 100m transactions, worth in excess of £3t. The company has
grown out of Ticon, a small consultancy focused on government procurement
and payments, founded by Ian Makgill.
34
Local Government Association (2015), ‘Local transparency guidance’,
https://www.local.gov.uk/our-support/guidance-and-resources/data-and-transparency/l
ocal-transparency-guidance
33
SeeThe Guardian(2010), ‘Government data: full textof David Cameron's letter
pledging to open up the datasets’,
https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jun/01/government-data-david-came
ron-letter
32
Gov.uk (2015), ‘Guidance Local government transparency code 2015’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-government-transparency-code-201
5
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             29

Spend Network provides services such as procurement intelligence to both
small and large businesses who are providers of services to local government.
It is also involved in a data reseller market to large consulting firms who then
offer services back to the public sector.
Spend Network data is standardised and linked and can be used to compare
between bodies, regions or sectors. The ability to compare can help with
spotting patterns and anomalies, which can then be addressed to improve the
delivery process. The data can also be used to compare between suppliers;
for example, comparing prices can inform spending decisions and lead to more
effective allocation of resources.
Spend Network also provides a service to government by re-publishing the open
data made available according to theOpen ContractingData Standard(OCDS).
OCDS was created by theOpen Contracting Partnershipand is used in many
countries around the world. This makes it easier to scale. The team behind
Spend Network are now using the standard and their experience gained in the
UK to expand their tender-finding services worldwide using the brand name
OpenOpps. FTSE 100 companies and the government usethe site.
Insights
Despite the guidance from central government on the publication of data by
local authorities, Spend Network spends a lot of time and effort identifying,
cleaning and analysing data. In this ecosystem, as an aggregator, they curate
data, push for its publication when it isn't available, query quality issues and
suggest improvements. They also lobby for data with copyrights to be
published openly.
However, despite the large amount of activity on both the part of Spend Network
and public sector organisations, and despite the opportunities mentioned, we
are yet to identify specific examples of where the data has been used to improve
procurement in a public sector organisation.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             30

Example 2b. NHS publication of open data
NHS open data – in a nutshell
The NHS spends over £110bn a year delivering health services in England and
has a complex arrangement for providing these services at a local level.
There are many organisations who variously support and oversee the design
and provision of services. Many of these organisations collect and analyse data,
which is used to analyse performance and improve quality and access to health
services for citizens. The ODI undertook a workshop with members of NHS
England and NHS Digital to begin to map out some of the key open data uses in
the NHS. The NHS is a vast network of organisations and understanding the full
position of use of open data would take considerable further research and
expert knowledge.
How open data can support the delivery of health services: benefits
to the public sector
The majority of data use within the NHS is individual-level data. This data is used
for the delivery of direct care or, in pseudonymised or anonymised form, for
research and planning. The data is made available to NHS organisations through
the NHS DigitalSecondary Uses Serviceand to outsideorganisations through
other means with appropriate controls in place. Some healthcare trusts have
data-sharing arrangements with private, voluntary or academic sector
organisations who also provide analytical insight and services to organisations
at various levels within the NHS. Performance improvement organisations in the
NHS such as clinical audits and theCommissioningSupport Units(CSUs)
also use data and analysis in their work with health care trusts and
Clinical Commissioning Groups.
NHS open data story
In our very cursory consideration of this area we identified some examples of
open data use. The ODI has highlighted inthis blogposta number of key open
35
data sets which have been – and are being – published. A relatively well-known
example of the potential of open data in the NHS is the use of open prescribing
data.Practice-level prescribing datais publishedby NHS Digital every month.
This is a list of all medicines, dressings and appliances prescribed by all
practices in England, including GP practices. In 2012, Mastodon C and the
Open Data Institute used this data to demonstrate the type of analysis that open
data could provide. They issued a report highlighting the savings the NHS could
make if they shifted from branded drugs to generic ones using the open
prescribing dataset. Latterly, an organisation calledOpen Prescribinghas been
using the data to provide ongoing analysis to the health service.
There are also examples of open publication of data within the NHS that have
been associated with clinical impacts. For instance, when MRSA instances were
published as open data there was an 85% reduction in the number of cases,
35
ODI (2015), ‘How can open data help improve healthcare?’,
https://theodi.org/blog/how-can-open-data-help-improve-healthcare
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             31

though it is difficult to disaggregate the impact that publication has from things
like media activity and quality and safety improvement work.
Insights
Although data is used routinely throughout the NHS, it seems from our initial
research that the potential of open data is not fully realised. The few examples
of open data publication are yet to show impacts in terms of changes to
services, despite the promise that they show (eg prescribing data).
The NHS open data agenda could perhaps learn from the tactics and
approaches used in ecosystems that we have explored elsewhere, where
connections have been made between the potential uses of open data and its
publication, and feedback loops established. We recognise that this is a more
complicated undertaking given that the NHS is a complex system and its data
is also complicated. There may be an opportunity to use a “problem-focused”
approach at Trust level and on data which is more able to be published due to
its non-personal nature (e.g. around service provision).
36
36
We welcome feedback as comments in the document or in an email to
randd@theodi.org
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             32

Example 2c. Urban Intelligence publishing local planning information
Urban Intelligence – in a nutshell
Urban Intelligence is a PlanTech startup developing a central repository of open
information on UK planning policies. A tool calledHowardprovides a map that
links planning policy information to its relevant locations, making it easier and
quicker to navigate the complex planning policy landscape. Howard offers a
mapping interface that allows property professionals to click on a site and get
all relevant planning policy information for that site. It is the first centralised
repository of planning policy information in the UK and allows planners to
assess planning risks and opportunities associated with a specific location.
How open data can support the delivery of urban planning services:
benefits to the public sector
Spatial planning and planning approvals are public services. The process is
simpler if the relevant policies for each location and project are easier to find.
Local authorities can use the platform free of charge to inform planning
decisions, and with planning information available online, it is quicker and easier
to provide this information to developers.
Urban Intelligence’s story
Urban Intelligence aggregates and organises information and data on planning
policy from local councils, including policy documents and geospatial data.
A number of local authorities have published their geographic data openly on
data.gov.ukvia Ordnance Survey's “Presumption toPublish” process.
Not all local authorities currently publish geographic data openly, which means
the platform can’t currently cover these areas. Urban Intelligence works closely
with local authorities to encourage them towards an open data approach.
As a member of Ordnance Survey’s Geovation Hub and as Ordnance Survey’s
partner organisation, Urban Intelligence has been developing their map feature
usingOrdnance Survey MasterMap. OS MasterMap is asource of highly
detailed geographic data about Great Britain, offering topographic, imagery and
networks layers. OS MasterMap data is not open, but theAutumn Budget
included a commitment that could lead to OS MasterMap data being made
available as open data.Open OS MasterMap data wouldencourage more
37
services like Howard to emerge.
The product is used by private sector organisations (planning consultancies,
architecture practices, property developers, etc), who are often interested in
understanding policy frameworks within and across different councils.
Equally, local authority planning officers are provided with access to the
platform for free to aid their work and service provision.
37
See ODI (2017), ‘What will the UK’s Geospatial Commission look like?’,
https://theodi.org/blog/what-will-the-uks-geospatial-commission-look-like
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             33

Insights
Local authorities differ in the types and amount of data they publish openly.
Actively working with them to support the release of open data to achieve
benefits for the public sector appears to work well. There may be potential for
peer-to-peer networks of local authorities at different stages of their open data
progress. The development of new tools and approaches is made easier when
geospatial data is made as open as possible. This should form part of any
strategy to build stronger data infrastructure at local or national level.
38
38
https://theodi.org/what-is-data-infrastructure
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             34

Pattern 3 – Open data for policy development
Finally, this group of examples centre around open data informing policy
development and strategic direction. In these, the direct beneficiaries are
involved in policy and strategy for the development of public services.
Openness improves access to data across different branches of government
and beyond, which can then be used to inform policy decisions.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             35

Example 3a. The Department for Work and Pensions development of
Churchill
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             36

Churchill – in a nutshell
Churchill is the working title for a digital data service being developed by the
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) that is run entirely on open data APIs
and data published in CSVs from UK government sources. The service is
a combination of a data visualisation tool built on D3 javascript libraries and
a Mongo DB backend.This videoexplains Churchillbriefly.
39
How open data can support the delivery of DWP services: benefits to
the public sector
Churchill helps policy and delivery officials in DWP to develop more
evidence-driven policy and services with data visualisations pulled from open
data across government.
DWP Churchill’s story
The DWP has a history of making its statistical data available to the public
through statistical publications and more recently through the online portal
Stats-Xplore. There was arenewed expectation thatthe department would
become more digitally driven,which has includeddata. This resulted in some
40
organisational restructuring to bring data teams and digital teams together.
The new Director General, Mayank Prakash, also made a commitment to
“driving hard for visualised analytics to be the normnot the exception”.
41
41
Digital Leaders (2017), ‘Transformation and Innovation – use of data analytics in
designing services’,
https://digileaders.com/transformation-innovation-use-data-analytics-designing-services
/
40
DWP Digital Blog (2017), ‘DWP Digital: Delivering the government transformation
vision’,
https://dwpdigital.blog.gov.uk/2017/02/17/dwp-digital-delivering-the-government-transf
ormation-vision/
39
Youtube (2017), ‘Churchill, making better use of data’,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hn-Utxqjthg
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             37

One of the data science teams based in Newcastle began exploring the user
needs of policy colleagues in the DWP who use data to inform policy and service
design. They undertook extensive user research with policy colleagues at Grades
6/7 about what their needs were, and then developed a persona and elaborated
the user needs for a new data-driven product. This work captured the level of
data literacy as well as the current workflows and packages being used. They
also considered other products and services that could be used by policy
professionals and analysts in the DWP, such asLGInformdeveloped by the
Local Government Association, which pulls togetherdata from DWP as well as
data published by local authorities. The eventual approach to the product was
inspired by the world of data journalism, including that used by ONS on their
ONS.visual site, which creates a number of statisticalvisualisations based on
user research.
An prototype of the software was developed in DWP. It draws on data available
from open data APIs across government, which is then copied into a database
and updated regularly. A key part of the development was to make sure that the
platform satisfied DWP security protocols – the system was set up from scratch.
The frontend visualisation is run on theD3 javascriptlibrary. Part of the
development of the product has beenworking in theopen.
42
There were a number of reasons for using open data to power the service.
First, in some instances, it is easier to access open data than it is to access
shared data. Second, some of the interviewees saw open data as trusted data
as it has gone through a process of quality assurance prior to publication.
The product was launched internally to demonstrate the possibilities to
colleagues. Subsequently, Churchill has attracted interest from other
government departments andhas been profiled externallyas well as having
43
had interest from the Canadian and Australian governments.
The main potential impact of this use of open data and the development of
Churchill is likely to be the reduced amount of time that policy colleagues and
analysts in the DWP will need to spend accessing, cleaning and analysing data.
This may also support more iterative and agile policy development as issues can
be investigated more quickly. Potentially, the tool could help release the resource
of an analyst.
Quicker data access and analysis can free up resources to better focus on policy
and strategy decision-making. In addition, better data quality and better data
visualisation can support more informed policy and strategy decisions.
Availability of data visualisations of related services means it is easier to spot
dependencies and relationships that need to be considered in service design
and the direction of policy decisions. An example of this could be more effective
job seeker allowance policy. This is in line with government aspirations set out in
43
apolitical (2017), ‘How can policymakers get the most out of data? Ask Churchill’,
https://apolitical.co/solution_article/can-policymakers-get-data-ask-churchill/
42
DWP Digital Blog (2017), ‘Data for people who don’t like data’,
https://dwpdigital.blog.gov.uk/2017/02/24/data-for-people-who-dont-like-data/
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             38

the recent Government Transformation Strategyto make better use of data by
44
making it available for internal uses through APIs.
If the tool was shared across government there would also be a strong
value-for-money benefit in the reduction of each department procuring individual
solutions, as well as the productivity impacts. In the longer run, it could support
greater standardisation of geographical data across government as civil servants
will be more able to spot the datasets that need standardisation by attempting to
use them through the tool. Use will also likely highlight anomalies or
inconsistencies, which will help to improve the quality of government open data
as there is a greater link between those who collect the data and those who are
using it.
Insights
The release of open data has brought innovation within government. Churchill’s
development by a team within DWP is only possible if data is opened up; open
data innovation leadership can come from unexpected places.
Digital transformation tools and approaches have supported the development of
a data product. One of the key drivers of Churchill’s development was that it was
incorporated within a broader digital transformation agenda within the DWP,
which gave energy and process to the development.
44
HMG (2017), ‘Government Transformation Strategy’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-transformation-strategy-2017-
to-2020/government-transformation-strategy#build-better-tools-processes-and-governa
nce-for-civil-servants
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             39

Example 3b. Cabinet Office release of government grants data
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             40

Government Grants Information System – in a nutshell
TheGovernment Grants Information System (GGIS)providesinformation
on grants worth £100 billion (2016–2017) from 16 government departments.
45
Grants range from government funding for schools, to UK Sport grants,
to funding for bus service operators.
How open data can support the delivery of grant-funded public
services: benefits to the public sector
Access to grants data provides government and external organisations with
opportunities to assess resource allocation on a national as well as on a more
granular level. This contributes to transparency, efficiency and effectiveness
in government.
Government Grants Information System’s story
The grants team within the Cabinet Office receive data from 16 central
government departments (including HM Treasury, who make payments to
departments to award grants but who also issue grants directly) on the grants
they pay out to about 35 organisations – for example, schools, UK Sport
organisations, or bus service operators. The total annual amount of grants
in GGIS is about £100 billion.
46
The 16 departments use their individual legacy systems to manage data.
To arrive at a common format, the departments transfer the data into a template
spreadsheet, which they send to the grants team in the Cabinet Office, where all
data gets aggregated in GGIS. Grants are structured in schemes, which are
broken down into individual awards. The majority of grants data is broken down
into awards but some of it is on a scheme level. The system generates unique
identifiers on an award and scheme level to allow detailed analysis. This data is
openly available to download in csv format.
The Cabinet Office use the data internally to inform policies and spot
opportunities for efficiency gains across government. GGIS data also feeds into
thegovernment grants register, where it can be downloadedin csv format.
The data also feeds into360Giving, who support fundersto publish their grants
data openly and in a comparable way on the open data platformGRANTNAV,
under the360Giving Standard.
GGIS offers transparency in the grants system, which makes up a substantial
share of the UK budget, and allows anyone to use this data to analyse grant
flows in the UK. Central government benefits from having a single source of data
in a common format to get a broad view across departments and to design an
intelligent grants system.
46
Gov.uk (n.d.), ‘Government grants register’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-grants-register
45
Gov.uk (n.d.), ‘Government grants register’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-grants-register
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             41

Individual departments benefit from understanding their own grant flows better
and identifying overlaps or synergies with other departments. As services
become more integrated, departments need to break down silos and understand
their role as part of a larger ecosystem; having sight of grants can help with that.
Open grants data also enables an assessment of particular programmes that are
run across departments.
360 Giving have launched aChallenge Fundto identifywhat questions need
47
answering and how open grants data can help. Participants submitted questions
about the geographical distribution of grantsandthe types of organisations
48
that receive grants.This initiative suggests thatopen grants data is used to
49
answer important questions about access to funding for the delivery of
public services.
Outside of government, the media, civil society and individual citizens can use
data to analyse grant flows or find out how much funding a local organisation
receives. Grant recipients can compare their own grants with those of similar
organisations and prepare targeted applications.
If open grants data is linked withOpen Contractingdata from the Crown
Commercial Service, it would be possible to identify the total amount of funding
received by an organisation in grants and project funding.
Open grants data refers to grants awarded. Ideally, in future this could be
compared with actual spending to get a full picture.
Insights
Sourcing data from different departments with their own legacy data
management systems and publishing it on different databases highlights the
importance of common data standards and formats that make it possible to
aggregate and compare datasets.
49
See for example Forum 360Giving (2017), ‘Core or project funding’,
https://forum.threesixtygiving.org/t/core-or-project-funding/121?u=natalia
48
See for example Forum 360 Giving (2017), ‘Profile by where there are geographical
gaps?’,
https://forum.threesixtygiving.org/t/profile-by-where-there-are-geographical-gaps/133
47
360Giving (2016), ‘Challenge Fund – seven weeks in’,
http://www.threesixtygiving.org/2018/01/03/challenge-fund-seven-weeks-in/
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             42

Insights from examples
There are some similarities across the examples which are worth elaborating on.
We can group these in terms of organisations and processes, and in terms of
effects and outcomes.
Organisational collaboration
A key characteristic is that each of the ecosystems is made up of organisations
that all play a discrete role in the delivery of a public service.
This characteristic is perhaps highlighted by the fact that in none of these
examples is one organisation responsible for the end-to-end delivery of public
service. Each of these public services in each of the ecosystems can only be
delivered if a number of organisations and individuals within those organisations
have the resources and appropriate knowledge to do their jobs correctly. When
working across organisations, the need for easy access and use of data
becomes even more important. In this way, open data can be said to be a
key ingredient in ensuring greater coordination, more efficiency and a better
end-user experience.
●
In the Leeds City Council example (1b.), Bartec and imactivate jointly
deliver the waste collection service
●
In the Urban Intelligence example (2c.), local planning involves councils,
developers and landowners and planning is made more efficient by the
service offered by Urban Intelligence
Technology infrastructure, digital skills and literacy
Another aspect of each of the ecosystems is the importance of technology.
There is a minimum level of digital infrastructure, skills and literacy, and
capability needed for public-sector organisations to make the most of open data
in their public-sector delivery model. This does not just relate to the technology
within the public sector but also within the wider ecosystem of the private sector
and civil society.
●
In the Leeds City Council example (1b.), Leeds City Council saw value
in open data and technology for local service delivery. This led to an
exploration of how open data can solve real problems and made the
development of the Leeds Bins app possible.
●
In the Familio example (1c.), guidance from the Department for Education
on the potential of open data for service delivery is an important success
factor. In order for councils to make use of the data, a minimum level of
digital skills and literacy are necessary.
●
In the Cabinet Office example (3b.), a dedicated team in the Cabinet
Office, through their understanding of the opportunities provided by
technology and data, support the establishment and use of the
Government Grants Information System.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             43

Foundational data infrastructure
A data infrastructure consists of data assets, the organisations that operate and
maintain them, the technologies and processes required to use the data, and
more. Strong data infrastructure opens up new opportunities– it makes it
50
easier for others to use data to create new products and services, or develop
new insight, and it can support diverse data ecosystems. Often, data
infrastructure will include foundational datasets that support a broad range of
uses, particularly if made available as open data that anyone can access, use
and share.
There are a number of key types of datasets that support the different
ecosystems we have identified. Given the nature of the discussions in the
interviews and workshops we held we cannot necessarily be sure that the most
important datasets were always highlighted, although geospatial data such as
maps, addresses and boundaries were of particular importance in at least half of
the ecosystems. They help members of the public and people within government
make sense of other data.
●
In the TfL example (1a.) data describing the location of stations is often
used to help people access the most relevant transport options nearby.
●
In the Urban Intelligence example (2c.), geographical data is at the core
of the tool Howard – which provides a map that links planning policy
information to its relevant locations – making it easier and quicker to
navigate the complex planning policy landscape.
●
In the Churchill example (3a.), administrative geography data is important
in understanding relationships with other open datasets.
Open standards for data
Data standards were used in open data releases across most of the ecosystems.
For instance, a data standard was developed following the development of the
Leeds Bins app.
●
In the example on local authority spending (2a.), two international
standards have been central to reducing the additional data preparation
and increasing the value of the data released.
●
In the Cabinet Office example (3b.), receiving grants data from different
departments across government with their own individual financial
systems highlights the importance of standards.
Senior-level championing
In many of the examples, we found that systems matured best when the open
approach was championed at the senior level. This can be a councillor, minister
or a senior individual, depending on the type of organisation. These senior
leaders highlight the strategic opportunity that the organisation has in releasing
open data, prioritise resources to focus on it, and give cover for others to
overcome internal resistance elsewhere in the organisation.
50
https://theodi.org/what-is-data-infrastructure
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             44

●
In the Leeds City Council example (1b.), the City Council’s drive and
initiative has been a key success factor, which led to problems being
articulated, solutions being developed, open data being included in the
contract with Bartec, and finally the Leeds Bins app.
Peer networks
As well as the senior leaders in these ecosystems, there was also a pattern
of peer networksacross organisations helping to encouragedevelopment.
Equally, closed data ecosystems can be developed with networks and
connections among key individuals. However, in the case of these open data
ecosystems it seems that influential networks may use different, more open,
channels and approaches – for instance connections through Twitter, blogging,
andunconferencessuch asOpen Data Camp,LocalGovCamp,etc (2a.).
This is currently anecdotal, and further research could look in more detail at
whether there is clearer evidence that processes and opportunities like these
have made a difference in the approach that some of these open data
ecosystems have taken.
Intermediaries
Key players within many of these ecosystems (1a., 2b.) are data intermediaries,
organisations which have a specific role in ensuring that the open data the
public sector organisations make available is usable by other organisations.
These intermediaries take data published openly or shared by the public and
private sector and can undertake a number of activities such as aggregating
data from a number of sources, standardising it and making it more usable by
others. The role of these organisations is not always obvious from a cursory
description of the effect of open data and can be missed from a description of
how open data is actually used to deliver a service. The exact form of the
intermediary and the activities they undertake can also belie the maturity of the
particular ecosystem.
●
In the Familio example (1c.), different providers, coordinated by the
council, deliver childcare and family services, and Famiio improves
access for citizens. The example highlights that it is important to consider
intermediaries and the role they play in the delivery of a service.
Problem focus
Where services have more successfully integrated open data in their delivery,
they have had processes that work to solve a particular problem that the
organisation is focused on rather than publishing open data for the sake of it.
●
In the DWP example (3a.), the team developing the Churchill service took
a user-centred design approach to understand how government policy
officials used data, and then sought out relevant open data to incorporate
into the product.
●
Similarly, in the Leeds City Council example (1b.), the app came out of an
acceleration programme to identify service issues which could be tackled
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             45

through the use of data and identified a specific problem of citizens not
knowing when their bins will be collected, which then drove the
development of a solution in the form of the Leeds Bins app. Different
approaches might also be successful in identifying how open data can
support the delivery of public services, but focused activity might be able
to identify opportunities more easily.
●
In examples 2a. (Spend Network), 2b. (NHS) and 3b. (Cabinet Office)
we can see a focus on the publication of open data rather than on a
problem. This might explain why these ecosystems are less mature in
their development than some of the others and why we found fewer
use cases.
Open innovation
Early releases of open data seem to have helped push forward and identify
further possibilities for improvement, which created impact in service delivery.
For instance, in the case of TfL the release of a small number of datasets as
feeds eventually led to the development of a more openAPIsystem
– a development which might not have happened if closed data-sharing
agreements had been made. In addition, in several of the ecosystems we
concluded that choosing an open approach to data publication has attracted
more external interest and involvement than if the public sector organisation
had taken a closed approach.
●
As an example, TfL are now be able to claim the involvement of more
than 14,000 developers in their data, which would have been difficult
if they had had to make arrangements to grant each of these
specific access.
●
In examples 1c. and 2c., organisations outside the public sector have
developed solutions for problems in delivering public services. This is
made possible by sharing the challenges and releasing the relevant
data openly.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             46

Recommendations
Based on the work undertaken so far, we have developed
recommendations for a range of actors in order to
support greater use of open data in the delivery of
public
 
services.
These are initial ideas: we would value feedback on themand will also test
51
them throughout the rest of the project. We have organised them according
to the main insights that we have identified from the research so far. These
recommendations are also based on the experience the ODI has gainedworking
with governments internationally to develop their open data programmes.
52
The main audience for the recommendations are those working in the public
sector and thinking about how to support their open data ecosystem to help
deliver their public service. However, we have also identified specific ways that
central government could support each of these aspects and have flagged these
up where relevant.
Organisational collaboration
●
In starting to explore the ways in which open data can support the
delivery of a service, be clear about which organisations are involved,
both within and outside of government.
●
Recognise that there are players in an open data ecosystem beyond
publishers and users. How data is licensed and published shapes those
ecosystems by making some roles more or less viable.
Central government recommendation: fund public sector
organisations to experiment with using open data to support
the delivery of public services
The availability of funding for activity is a key determinant of activity. We
received 24 responses to the invitation to tender for the Stimulus Fund aspect of
this project. We could have funded more consortia if we had had the resources
to do so. There is clearly appetite within local government to undertake
experiments in this area but there are funding challenges. Central government
should consider funding further activity in this area to help develop these new
patterns and deliver better services to citizens.
52
ODI (2015), ‘Open data in government: how to bring about change’,
http://opengov.si.md/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/255887396-Open-data-in-governme
nt-how-to-bring-about-change.pdf.
51
We welcome feedback as comments in the document or in an email to
randd@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             47

Technology infrastructure, digital skills and literacy
●
Consider how a focus on the potential of open data to support your
service could be undertaken as part of any digital transformation in
your organisation.
●
Ensure that you have the appropriate underlying technology and skills.
●
Support staff to use open data in public service delivery with practical
tools and approaches
Central government recommendation: train public sector staff how to
use open data in public sector delivery
In the fieldwork, participants referred to the Government Digital Service (GDS)
leadership on service design as best practice. This extended to the curriculum
for the GDS academy and the GDS service design manual, which were influential
both for public sector staff and the training courses they received from public
and private sector training providers.
As part of the expansion of the curriculum of service design training towards
covering data and technology roles and digital competencies, we recommend
developing specific content for this. This would build on some of the insights
from this research to help those in non-technical roles understand how open
data can support services at a strategic level. By including content on this
topic in the core curriculum, we would hope to influence broader training
activity to also encompass this topic and hence increase use of open data
in public service delivery.
Data infrastructure
●
Public services are underpinned by data infrastructure.It is essential
53
that this data infrastructure is as open as possible, while respecting
privacy, to support innovation and encourage the creation of efficient
and effective services.
Open standards for data
●
Explore whether open standards are already developed for the data that
your service supports.
Senior-level championing
●
Ensure that senior management and elected representatives are aware of
the opportunities to use open data to deliver your services and champion
its use in delivery.
Peer networks
●
If you have not already, join existing networks on Twitter and through
unconferences such asUKGovCampandLocalGovCamp.
53
https://theodi.org/what-is-data-infrastructure
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             48

●
Create a network of those who are interested and involved in using open
data for public service delivery.
●
Allow members of your organisation to network across and outside
your organisation.
●
The ODI has recently published amethods paper ondeveloping peer
networks for open data leaderswhich contains morerecommendations
for activities.
54
Intermediaries
●
When looking to elaborate the broader ecosystems, identify and establish
relationships with intermediary organisations who are adding value by
taking and transforming their data for other purposes.
Problem focus
●
Focus initial discussion of an open data approach to service delivery
on the issue you are trying to improve in the service rather than the data
that is available. Always link the benefits of the publication or use of
open data to your organisation’s overarching or fundamental goals
and objectives.
54
ODI (2016), ‘Method report: Peer networks for open data leaders’,
https://theodi.org/method-report-peer-networks-for-open-data-leaders
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             49

Next steps
To carry the research findings forward, we will pilot learning materials
and continue working with the Stimulus Fund consortia to experiment
with redesigning public services using open data.
Learning materials
We are developing and testing a range of learning materials with different
audiences within the public sector.
These will build on the learnings from this report and the materials which are
being developed by the four consortia that are part of the Stimulus Fund.
Specifically, we will also continue to develop the ecosystem mapping
methodology. So far, in the fieldwork and broader engagement undertaken
in this research, we have received positive feedback regarding ecosystem
mapping as a way to elaborate and understand how open data can make
public service delivery better.
We will further develop the methodology in the remainder of our research.
In particular, we will:
●
adopt the methodology to document the work undertaken in the four
Stimulus Fund consortia
●
examine how this methodology can be used as one of the learning
materials developed in this project
●
extend the methodology to other aspects of theODI’sR&D programme,
including itsopen standards for dataproject
●
explore how this methodology can more systematically capture the
commonalities identified between ecosystems in this research, such
as the foundational data, open standards used, etc.
Stimulus Fund
The four Stimulus Fund consortia will finish their redesign of a public service
using open data. They will create design patterns and capture the effects open
data has or will have on the delivery of their public service. Along the course of
the funding period, they will capture their learning and develop tools and
approaches that they find useful as part of their redesign process. We will share
the design patterns, tools and approaches openly on ODI’s website as resources
for other councils that want to redesign public services using open data.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             50

Method
Having settled on a working definition of a public service, we started our
research by compiling a database of UK and international examples to identify
which examples to pursue.
These examples came from three sources. First, there were those which were
already known to members of the ODI through its global work with the public
and private sector.
A second source was a broad internet search and screening research
organisations that had similarly been focusing on the open data agenda.
This included organisations such as Open Knowledge, GovLab, the Knight
Foundation and Sunlight Foundation, amongst others. In addition, we looked
at open data portals where they listed examples of use.
Finally, we undertook a search of reports and other documents published on
the topic of data use within UK government, with a specific focus on open data.
We supported this secondary research by primary research interviews with
experts from the community. These interviews highlighted examples and helped
to develop and expand our approach and explanatory framework for the rest of
the project.
The details in the examples were mostly captured in workshops with individuals
who had a close working knowledge of the area. We spent the majority of the
workshop time working with the participants to draw a rich picture of the
example identified and talking through the key aspects that emerged.
Working with illustratorIan Dutnall, we have translatedthese rich pictures into
more schematic diagrams and accompanied them with a written description
of the key characteristics of each. We have tried to make these examples as
comparable as possible but due to their subject matter and the insight of the
individuals, there may be differences in detail.
In the process of developing the illustrations and drafting the descriptions of the
examples, we have reconfirmed the detail with relevant individuals and, where
appropriate, have omitted commercially sensitive or otherwise confidential
information at their request.
Open Data Institute 2018 / Using open data to deliver public servicesWhat data publishers need             51