



Contents
Executive summary5
Introduction8
Chapter 1: Data
for green finance10
Chapter 2: Data assurance for green finance15
Chapter 3: Embedding data assurance in
green finance21
Next steps28
Appendices29
Glossary34
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance2

About
This draft report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute,
and published in June 2022. Its lead authors are Matt Davies and Lucas Stiglich,
with contributions from Deborah Yates, Milly Zimeta, Annalisa Eichholzer and
Mahad Alassow.
To share feedback you can comment directly on this document, or contact the
ODI’s Policy team atpolicy@theodi.org.
This report is published under theCreative CommonsAttribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International licence.
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and
click ‘Add comment' (the ‘+’ plus icon) on the right-hand side of the page.
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions
from the community in the comments.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance3

Executive summary
Averting the worst impacts of climate change requires organisations in every
sector to shift investment away from harmful activities and towards projects which
support the transition to net zero carbon. To facilitate this shift, an ecosystem of
green financefirms has sprung up, offering servicesrelated to reporting the
environmental performance of sectors, companies and their activities.
These organisations, which range from data providers and vendors to
environmental, social and governance (ESG) investment funds, indexes and
ratings agencies, are fundamentally data businesses. The way they create impact
can be understood in terms of the Open Data Institute’s (ODI’s) established
concept of the‘data value chain’:
●
Data stewardship:companies and data providers stewardenvironmental
performance data: collecting it, maintaining it and sharing it.
●Insight creation:companies, asset owners and financialorganisations
create information from this data in the form of analyses, insights, and
visualisations, which are disclosed to investors.
●Decision-making:investors (both institutional andretail) make decisions
about how to invest on the basis of this information and other factors.
However, the integrity of this process is threatened bygreenwashing: ‘the
practice of businesses or investment funds making misleading or unsubstantiated
claims about their environmental performance’. This threat, over time, risks
discrediting the green finance agenda entirely and jeopardising the transition to
net zero carbon.
At the ODI, we believe that the wider adoption ofdata assurancepractices –
which we define as ‘the process, or set of processes, that increase confidence
that data will meet a specific need, and that organisations collecting, accessing,
using and sharing data are doing so in trustworthy ways’ – could help tackle
greenwashing, and build trust in environmental performance data, by delivering
the below:
●
Consistencyof,andcompliancewith,metrics, standardsand ratings,
reducing the ability of organisations to ‘shop around’ to find indicators that
are more favourable to them.
●Transparencyabout how data is being used to produceinsights into
environmental performance and make decisions about capital allocation
based on these insights.
●Accountabilityto external stakeholders, preventingorganisations from
‘marking their own homework’ on their environmental performance.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance4

Firms offering data assurance products and services are being created at a rate of
nearly 12% per annum, and we expect to see continued growth in the years to
come, as more organisations grapple with demand for data and the need to build
confidence in that data with customers, shareholders and the public. This includes
products and services focused on assurance of environmental performance data,
which are increasingly offered by traditional professional services firms as well as
new entrants into the sector.
Current initiatives tend to focus on the first stage of the green finance data value
chain (data stewardship) and particularly on thevalidityof the data used for
disclosure, with some also focusing ontransparencyanddata sharing.
Comparatively few companies are focusing on assurance of data and data
practices at the second (insight creation) and third (decision-making) stages of the
green finance data value chain, or on attributes beyond the provenance and
quality of data.
We think that different assurance activities are essential at each stage of the green
finance data value chain, for example by:
●
at thedata stewardshipstage, helping to ensure thatthe right data is
collected and shared, and that its collection and reporting follows
appropriate standards
●at theinsight creationstage, helping to ensure thatorganisational
processes for reporting are compliant with legal and regulatory
requirements, and are comparable across different companies and
investment products
●at thedecision-makingstage, ensuring that decision-makingand
accountability processes adequately take into account and respond to the
information created from data.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance5

The year 2022 is likely to be a pivotal year for the green finance agenda, as new
requirements for disclosure of environmental performance will come into force
around the world. We have identified three areas that will require further
investigation and intervention from policymakers in order to embed data
assurance practices in green finance and help the sector realise its full potential:
●
Laying the foundations for the assurance of data for green finance, by
working on developing clear definitions and standards, as well as ensuring
that the organisations evaluating environmental performance are trusted
by the general public.
●Driving and directing the growth of the assurance sector, by taking
steps to stimulate demand for data assurance services, ensuring quality of
the services provided, and assessing the additional costs and benefits
introduced by embedding assurance of data in green finance.
●Future proofing the assurance of data for green financeby addressing
emerging challenges and opportunities such as the prevalence of missing
data for disclosure requirements, the increasing use of alternative data
sources, the need for assurance of artificial intelligence systems, and the
emergence of data institutions that steward environmental performance
data.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance6

Introduction
We are living through what is increasingly being termed a climate emergency – by
scientists, activists, politicians and business people alike. According toreports
from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, levels of
global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions must peak by 2025 if we are to avert the
worst impacts of global heating.
Countries across the world have committed to legally binding carbon emission
reduction targets at a series of international summits – most recently theParis
AgreementandCOP26. In 2019, the UK becamethe firstmajor economy to
commit in law to net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Meeting these
targets will require organisations in every sector to shift investment away from
polluting activities and towards projects which support the transition to a net zero
economy.
Investors and consumers increasingly expect their money to support these
environmental objectives, with the Financial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) most
recentFinancial Lives surveyfinding that 71% ofUK retail investors want to ‘invest
in a way that is protecting the environment’. To meet this need, an ecosystem of
firms has sprung up offering services related to the reporting of environmental
performance; from providers of data about climate-related impacts, to indices and
ratings of environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance.
The market for green finance-related services – including ratings, data and verification
– is a relatively new one, but it is fast-growing, withOptimasestimating that the
market for green finance and related services was worth $1bn by the end of 2021 and
predicting annual growth rates of more than 20% in the coming years.
While the green finance sector continues to grow, its integrity is threatened by
greenwashing: defined in the UK government’sGreenFinance Roadmapas ‘the
practice of businesses or investment funds making misleading or unsubstantiated
claims about their environmental performance’. Reports in both themainstream
andfinancialpress have highlighted instances ofenvironmental performance
being exaggerated or misrepresented, while 60% of the respondents to the2021
Schroders Institutional Investor Studycited it asa major concern; more than any
other issue.
By diminishing consumer, investor and policymaker trust in the reporting of
environmental performance, greenwashing threatens to discredit the green finance
agenda entirely:Erik Thedéen, chair of the sustainablefinance task force at the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (Iosco), has argued that
‘greenwashing could damage the credibility of the green finance movement,
endangering the work to limit the rise in global temperatures to 1.5°C.’
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance7

At the ODI, we believe thatdata assurance– ‘theprocess, or set of processes,
that increase confidence that data will meet a specific need, and that
organisations collecting, accessing, using and sharing data are doing so in
trustworthy ways’ – can help to tackle greenwashing. By improving transparency,
accountability and consistency across the sector, data assurance can improve
both trust in, and the trustworthiness of, environmental performance data and help
ensure the green finance agenda succeeds.
This draft (open for comment) report gives an overview of the role that data plays
in the green finance system(Chapter 1); exploreswhat data assurance for green
finance looks like(Chapter 2); and suggests someareas that will require further
investigation and intervention if data assurance is to be embedded in green
finance(Chapter 3).
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance8

Chapter 1: Data
for green finance
Having the right data on the environmental risks and impacts of companies
will be essential if we are to make finance ‘green’. This chapter gives an
overview of the role that data plays in the green finance system and explores
some of the structural factors which drive greenwashing.
From data to decision-making
The termgreen financerefers to two separate, butoverlapping, trends within the
finance sector. The first of these might be referred to as ‘greening finance’: a
movement to encourage investors to cease investment in companies and
investment products which adversely impact the environment, thereby
withdrawing funding from environmentally harmful activities and so indirectly
supporting the transition to a net zero economy. The second might be termed
‘financing green’, and can be understood as efforts to actively direct investment
towards companies and investment products that are contributing to the transition
to a net zero economy.
Green finance, in short, is about making investment decisions that, at worst, don’t
adversely impact the environment – and at best improve it. Meeting these aims
requires investors to have access to new sources of information to inform their
decision-making. While previously decisions about where to allocate capital may
have rested on a narrow set of metrics related to a company’s financial
performance, green finance instead requires that they are made on the basis of a
wider range of considerations related to environmental performance.
The need to provide investors with this information is why data on environmental
performance (hereafter referred to asenvironmentalperformance data) is so
fundamental to green finance. The ODI’stheory ofchangesets out how three
activities create impact from data:
●
Data stewardship– collecting it, maintaining it andsharing it.
●Insight creation –creating informationfrom thatdata in the form
of products and services, analyses and insights, or stories and
visualisations.
●Decision-making –deciding what to do, informed byinformation from
multiple sources along with experience and understanding.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance9

Each of these activities can be carried out by individuals, companies, communities
and governments. In the context of green finance, investors need to have access
to relevant information on the environmental performance of the companies and
products they are choosing to invest in or divest from in order to make decisions.
This information, in turn, will need to be underpinned by accurate, high-quality
data – in most cases, combinations of data from multiple sources.
Applying the ODI’s theory of change to the green finance data value chain, the
process by which data creates value, can help clarify this complex space, and can
be summed up as follows:
●
Companies and data providersstewarddataon environmentalrisks:
collecting it, maintaining it and sharing it
●Companies, asset owners and financial organisationscreate insightfrom
this data, which is disclosed to investors.
●Investors (both institutional and retail)make decisionsabout how to
invest on the basis of this information and other factors.
Data needs for green finance
To arrive at some indicative examples of data for green finance, the following
questions can be asked, starting with the decision-making stage and moving
backwards along the green finance data value chain:
1.
What decisions need to be made?Decisions need tobe made about
how to manage three factors: transition risks, physical risks and
externalities (see Table 1).
2.What information is needed to make these decisions?This is
determined by the specific risk that has been identified in step 1.
3.What data is needed to produce the relevant information?This is
determined by the information identified as necessary in step 2.
Table 1draws on these questions to provide some indicativeexamples of data
needs for green finance.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance10

Table 1: Examples of data needs for green finance along the three ODI data
value chain stages
What kinds of investment
decisions need to be made?
What information needs to
be created?
What data should be
stewarded?
Decisions about
transition risks
Transition risks are
business-related risks arising
from the changes necessary for
the transition to net zero, which
include changes in technology,
policy, regulation, markets and
consumer sentiment.
Scope 1 emissions
Direct greenhouse gas
emissions from company
activities. Disclosure required
under new UK legislation on
Sustainability Disclosure
Requirements (SDRs).
Data on operational processes
that emit GHGs (for example
manufacturing activities,
transportation, waste
disposal).
Scope 2 emissions
Indirect emissions from
purchased electricity, heat or
steam. Disclosure required by
SDRs.
Data on energy consumption
by sources.
Scope 3 emissions
Emissions that occur in the
value chain of the reporting
company both upstream and
downstream remain.
Disclosure currently voluntary.
Data from upstream activities
such as those of companies
executing outsourced
activities, fuel consumption by
contractor owned vehicles,
and the production processes
of purchased materials; and
downstream data such as the
emissions generated from the
use of products produced and
sold by the company.
Decisions about
physical risks
Physical risks are
business-related risks arising
as a consequence of the
climatic impact of global
heating and the increased
frequency or severity of
extreme weather events.
Flood risk to company assetsData on flood risk and historic
flood incidence; data on the
location of operations and
assets; data about climate
conditions such as
precipitation, temperature and
sea levels; scenario forecasts
of future weather conditions.
Decisions about externalities
Impacts on the climate and
environment as a consequence
of business activities, but
without necessarily posing
business-related risks.
Pollution prevention and
control
Data on the location of
operations and assets;
localised data on air quality
such as the density of
particulate matter; data on
emissions from operations to
water, air or land.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance11

Environmental performance reporting is increasingly a legal requirement, with
eight jurisdictions including the UK, the EU and Japan having introduced
environmental disclosure requirements aligned with standards set out by the
G20-founded Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)as of
September 2021.
This means that, in practice, the types of decisions made by investors – and
therefore the information and data needs underlying those decisions – will be
determined by legal reporting requirements, rather than investor discretion.
More information on disclosure requirements in the UK context can be found
inAppendix 1.
Enablers of greenwashing
Greenwashingis the practice of businesses or investmentfunds making
misleading or unsubstantiated claims about their environmental performance.
Reports in both themainstreamandfinancialpresshave highlighted instances of
environmental performance being exaggerated or misrepresented, while 60% of
the respondents to the2021 Schroders InstitutionalInvestor Studycited it as a
major concern; more than any other issue.
By diminishing consumer, investor, and policymaker trust in the reporting of
environmental performance, greenwashing threatens to discredit the green finance
agenda entirely:Erik Thedéen, chair of the sustainablefinance task force at the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (Iosco), has argued that
‘greenwashing could damage the credibility of the green finance movement,
endangering the work to limit the rise in global temperatures to 1.5C.’
Greenwashing can arise from intentionally dishonest business practices, but it is
also enabled by structural and systemic factors:
●
Inconsistencyof existing frameworks, definitions,ratings and standards.
This createsspace for companies and investors to‘shop around’for
indicators that are more favourable to them.
●Lack of transparencyas to how data is being usedto produce insights
and make decisions about strategies for mitigating climate risk and
reducing environmental impacts. Organisations may purport to make
decisions on the basis of environmental performance information
underpinned by sound data, but refuse to make this public as a result
of uneven transparency requirements.
●Lack of accountabilityto external stakeholders, withorganisations
frequently ‘marking their own homework’ about their exposure to climate
risk and environmental impacts, as a result of weak institutional
arrangements. In other words, even when decisions and the information
and data underlying them are transparent, poor or non-existent
accountability mechanisms can mean that investment in environmentally
harmful activities continues unabated.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance12

Example of structural factors enabling greenwashing
This section provides a simplified example of how these structural factors
enable greenwashing at each stage of the green finance data value chain.
Data stewardship stage
Amanufacturing companywants to gather data on theenvironmental impact of
its activities, both to fulfil mandatory reporting obligations placed on itself and its
owners, and also to make voluntary disclosures to gain a competitive advantage.
The company leadership decides to source this data through a combination of
internal data gathering activitiesand by procuringdata collection services from
external data aggregators and providers.
At this stage, the data might be inconsistent in format, level of detail or standards
for reporting environmental performance. If the manufacturing company fears that
its environmental performance will be found to be poor, it might be tempted to
‘shop around’ – selecting metrics that highlight their lack of exposure to certain
physical and transition risks, while minimising the negative environmental
externalities produced by the company’s activities. Even if no deception is
intended by either the manufacturing company itself or the external data provider,
there is a risk that the metrics selected will not accurately or comprehensively
reflect the company’s environmental performance.
Insight creation stage
After stewarding the relevant data, the manufacturing company, itsinvestorsand
anyfinancial indicesit is listed on want to usethis data on the company’s
environmental impacts to create insights into its environmental performance for
compliance with disclosure requirements.
At this stage in the data value chain, it is possible that inaccurate information may
be created due to inconsistency and lack of standardisation in the frameworks and
definitions on environmental performance. Different indices and ratings agencies
provide opinions on different aspects of sustainability performance and their
assessments may not always be comparable. Again, there may be an incentive at
this stage for the manufacturing company and its investors to shop around for
more favourable assessments. In that sense, inconsistency of frameworks and
definitions, coupled with an interest to show good performance indicators,
incentivises greenwashing. This, in turn, is further exacerbated by the lack of
transparency and accountability over how ratings and indices are arrived at, which
makes comparisons across different companies and investment products difficult.
Decision-making stage
Once the disclosures have been made,investorswantto use the insights created
at the insight creation stage to make investment decisions informed by the
environmental performance and the climate-related risks of their investments and
existing alternatives.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance13

At this stage in the data value chain, it is possible that the information created in
the previous stage will not be properly reflected in the decision-making process,
resulting in poor investment decisions, or investments that contribute to global
heating.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance14

Chapter 2: Data assurance
for green finance
Data assurance practices can help to improve confidence in data and how it
is being used. This chapter explores what data assurance for green finance
could look like, and how it can help to mitigate the structural causes of
greenwashing.
Building trust in environmental performance data
Assurance of business practices has existed for years, allowing businesses
to demonstrate trustworthiness to investors, consumers and regulators. These are
evolving, and we anticipate that assurance of dataand data practices will be
increasingly important as digital and technology dominate the way we
do business.
At the ODI, we definedata assuranceas:‘the process,or set of processes, that
increase confidence that data will meet a specific need, and that organisations
collecting, accessing, using and sharing data are doing so in trustworthy ways.’
As detailed in Figure 1, assurance activities can help to improve trust in a range
of attributes associated with data and datasets, such as data provenance,
discoverability and quality, as well as data practices, such as how data is shared,
governed and kept secure.
Figure 1 – Data practices and datasets: what can be assured?
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance15

In the context of green finance, we believe that the wider adoption of data
assurance practices could help to undermine the systemic enablers of
greenwashing, and build trust in environmental performance data, by delivering
the following:
●
Consistencyof,andcompliancewith,metrics, standardsand ratings,
reducing the ability of organisations to ‘shop around’ in order to find
indicators that are more favourable to them.
●Transparencyabout how data is being used to produceinsights and
make decisions about capital allocation based on these insights.
●Accountabilityto external stakeholders, preventingorganisations from
‘marking their own homework’ about their environmental performance.
The remainder of this chapter focuses on data assurance in the green finance
sector.Appendix 2goes into further detail on therange of data assurance
activities and the organisations involved in carrying them out.
Data assurance in green finance
Research carried out for the ODI by Frontier Economics in 2021found a nascent
but buoyant market of UK business-to-business data assurance firms and
services, with around 900 firms offering data assurance products and services in
the UK, and more than half of them having been incorporated in the previous 10
years. Data assurance firms are being created at a rate of nearly 12% per annum,
and we expect to see continued growth in the years to come, as more
organisations grapple with demand for data and the need to build confidence in
that data with customers, shareholders and the public.
This market includes data assurance products and services focused on
environmental performance data. Traditional professional services firms such as
KPMG, Ernst and Young, PwC and Deloitte (sometimes referred to as the Big Four)
have started paying attention to opportunities in the ESG assurance sector, with
onerecent blog post by KPMGarguing that ESG assurancewill be a ‘game
changer’ for the professional services sector. Services offered bythesefirmsare
generally focused on offering independent assurance of the data and frameworks
used for disclosure, as well as of legal and regulatory compliance.
In addition to incumbent firms, ESG assurance products are being developed by
new entrants to the market. The second cohort of theFCA’s Digital Sandbox
focused on supporting firms that are developing innovative or disruptive products
and services in the area of ESG data and disclosure. This cohort included firms
such asGreenway Analytics, which draws on multipledata sources (for example
from Internet of Things devices, Energy Performance Certificate reports and
satellite imagery) to validate reported data on energy performance, and using
machine learning to provide environmental insights into the impact achieved.
Another company,Telespazio UK, is working on a toolthat uses satellite imagery
to measure environmental impacts on forests in order to assign an impact score
and a recovery score for economic activities.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance16

Most companies working on innovative assurance solutions face barriers to
scaling them up, including a lack of standardisation around scores and metrics (as
highlighted above), as well asissues around interoperabilityand access to data.
Some companies are focused on tackling these issues, for example:
●
Synectics Solutionsis creating a standardised datamodel for storing and
transmitting ESG data.
●Element22andESGihave developed a product for financialinstitutions to
share ESG data between them.
●Coriolis Technologiesis developing standardised andglobal ESG scoring
methodologies.
As these examples show, current initiatives tend to focus on the first stage of the
green finance data value chain (data stewardship), and particularly on thevalidityof
the data used for disclosure, with some also focusing ontransparencyanddata
sharing. Comparatively few companies are focusingon assurance of data and data
practices at the second (insight creation) and third (decision-making) stages of the
green finance value chain, or on attributes beyond data provenance and quality.
Data assurance across the data value chain
Different activities to provide assurance of data will be relevant at each stage of
the green finance data value chain, for example by ensuring that:
●
the right data is collected and shared, and that its collection and reporting
follows appropriate standards
●organisational processes for reporting and insight creation are compliant
with legal and regulatory requirements, and are comparable across
different companies and investment products
●decision-making processes adequately take into account and respond to
the information created from data.
Some examples of data assurance in the context of environmental performance
data are inTable 2.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance17

Table 2: Assurance across the green finance data value chain
ODI data value chainStage 1: Data
stewardship
Stage 2: Insight
creation
Stage 3:
Decision-making
What happens at this
stage?
Data is gathered on
environmental impact of
companies and their
activities.
Data is analysed to
create insights into
environmental impact of
investments.
Investment decisions
are made on the basis
of insights created at
the previous stage.
Who is involved?Specialist data
providers; companies
themselves
Companies and their
owners; financial
organisations
Investors (retail and
institutional)
What are the
greenwashing risks?
Incorrectly sourced
data; poor quality data
Inconsistency of
frameworks
Weak institutional
arrangements; failure to
act
What aspects of data
need to be assured?
Validity, provenance,
privacy, security, ethics,
user engagement
Interoperability; legal
and regulatory
compliance;
availability;
discoverability
Quality and accuracy
What data practices
might need to be
assured?
Sharing and acquisition,
knowledge
management,
governance and internal
oversight, skills and
knowledge, privacy,
security, ethics and
transparency, user
engagement
Skills and knowledge;
strategy, quality and
accuracy, data access
processes
User engagement; user
support
What sort of assurance
products or services
might be suitable?
Guidance on design
and collection of data;
validation against
agreed standards
Certification of
organisational
processes against
pre-defined standards
Audits of
decision-making
processes
The remainder of this chapter returns to our example of a
manufacturing firm to explore in more detail how assurance of data
and data practices might work in the context of green finance.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance18

Data stewardship
Amanufacturing companywants to gather data on theenvironmental impact of
its activities, both to fulfil mandatory reporting obligations placed on itself and its
owners and also to make voluntary disclosures to gain a competitive advantage.
The company leadership decides to source this data through a combination of
internal data gathering activities and by procuring data collection services from an
externaldata provider.
At this stage, the manufacturing company itself might want to consider the
following data assurance practices:
●
Assurance of its own data practices and those of the provider,
including the appropriate sharing and acquisition of data and
organisational governance; risk management; and data management
policies and processes once the data has been collected or procured.
Activities to help provide assurance here could include checking that data
access and management processes are being followed, or that they are in
line with the company’s data strategy; or more formal mechanisms such
as external audit or certification to an agreed industry standard.
●Assurance of the data itself,particularly its provenance(where it is from
and how it was produced), validity (its accuracy and quality), linkability,
and risks related to its use for this particular purpose. Activities to help
provide assurance here could include documentation or licensing, or
validation against a set of standards.
Insight creation
After stewarding the relevant data, the manufacturing company, itsinvestorsand
anyfinancial indicesit is listed on want to usethis data to create insights into its
environmental performance for disclosure.
At this stage, they might want to consider the following assurance practices:
●
Assurance of data practices relevant to the creation of insights,
including the presence of relevant skills and knowledge, the adoption of
an appropriate strategy, and the suitability of data analysis processes (for
example that they are repeatable and transparent). Activities to help
provide assurance here could include the certification of organisational
processes against a set of standards.
●Assurance of the data itself,particularly its interoperabilitywith other
datasets that it might need to be linked or combined with, and its
compliance with any legal and or regulatory expectations. Activities to
help provide assurance here could include documentation or licensing, or
validation against a set of standards.
●Access to data assurance outputsfrom the previousstage.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance19

Decision-making
Once the disclosures have been made,investors (bothretail and institutional)
want to use the insights created at the stage, to make investment decisions
informed by the likely environmental impact of their investments.
At this stage, they might want to consider the following assurance practices:
●
Assurance of data practices relevant to the decision-making stage,
including that data users have been appropriately engaged and supported
throughout; that decisions have been informed by data and insights which
the company is justifiably confident in; and that the limitations of those
data and insights are known. Activities to help provide assurance here
could include checking organisational processes against certain
predefined standards.
●Access to data assurance outputsfrom the previousstage.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance20

Chapter 3: Embedding
data assurance in
green finance
For the green finance agenda to succeed, it will need to be accompanied by
measures to embed data assurance within the sector. This chapter sets out
areas for investigation and intervention to embed data assurance at each
stage of the green finance data value chain.
The year 2022 is likely to be a pivotal year for the green finance agenda, with new
requirements for the disclosure of environmental performance information coming
into force in jurisdictions across the world, including the UK, the EU and Japan.
For more information on disclosure requirements in the UK, please refer to
Appendix 1.
If new disclosure requirements are to be successful, they will need to be
accompanied by measures to catalyse the development of an assurance sector
around environmental performance data and mainstream these practices in green
finance.
These measures fall into three categories:
●
Laying the foundations for the assurance of environmental
performance data
●Driving and directing the growth of the assurance sector
●Future proofing the assurance of environmental performance data
Laying the foundations for the assurance of
data for green finance
Defining green
Data assurance is about increasing confidence that data will meet a specific
purpose, but this is difficult without clear criteria for evaluating whether that
purpose is being supported. In the case of green finance, this means that
assurance of data and data practices will require clear guidance on what is
considered to be sustainable, and what risks and impacts need to be considered
to evaluate sustainability.
An important prerequisite for assurance of environmental performance data will
therefore be clarity on which transition risks, physical risks and environmental
externalities should be considered in evaluating the environmental sustainability of
economic activities and investments, and thus influence investment decisions.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance21

As mentioned above, and discussed in more detail inAppendix 1, this work is
already in train, both in the UK and in other jurisdictions.
We think it will be important for mandatory disclosure requirements to
provide clear, usable definitions of the risks and impacts that ought to be
reflected in sustainability reporting. This should reflect the role that data
assurance products and services can play in further refining such definitions
and improving the trustworthiness of environmental disclosures.
Reporting standards
In standardising statutory sustainability disclosure requirements (SDRs), financial
regulators can define the type, frequency and level of detail of the information to
be disclosed, and formalise it as adata standard– a documented, reusable
agreement that helps people and organisations to publish, access, share and use
better quality data.
By introducing requirements on what data must be disclosed, regulators also
determine what kind of data companies and financial product providers need to
collect, manage and share from their operations and their wider supply chain.
Additionally, regulators can assure data published within their sector, assessing
the quality of what is reported and ensuring that it meetsbest practice standards.
This will allow consumers and investors to be able to better compare different
products and companies.
We think that it will be important for regulators to support open data
standards for sustainability reporting, helping to consolidate a standards
ecosystem which is currently crowded and complex.
Trusted rating providers
As mentioned above, the capacity to ‘shop around’ for favourable ratings and
indicators is an enabler of greenwashing. This risk can be mitigated by setting
standards for ratings and indicators. The legitimacy of ratings ultimately depends
on the legitimacy of the organisations providing them. The question remains of
whether public bodies such as regulators should define or provide ESG ratings or
whether it should be an entirely private matter.
While it is important that providers are trusted by investors, asset managers and
companies, the consequences of green finance affect the wider public and not
just those actively participating in investment decisions. Our work onTrusted Data
Institutions, andTrustworthy Data Stewardship, andourrecommendationsto the
CMA on the future oversight of open banking, offer some pointers on how this can
be achieved.
We think the government, regulators and industry bodies should take steps
to ensure that standards and ratings are provided by institutions that are
trusted not only by investors and companies, but also by the wider public.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance22

Driving and directing the growth of the
assurance sector
Increasing demand
It is likely that the introduction of new disclosure requirements (seeAppendix 1)
will stimulate the growth of the environmental performance data assurance market
by creating incentives for firms, investors and regulators to provide assurance that
the data being used to comply with these requirements is suitable. However, there
might be downstream barriers and market failures preventing these services from
emerging.
In most sectors, companies will often have a direct interest in ensuring that the
data they use is trustworthy, regardless of whether the SDRs require them to do
so. Using poor quality or unreliable data could impact the effectiveness of
company decision-making, harming profitability. In the case of data on
environmental performance, this won’t always be the case. Companies and
investors are bound to a certain extent by fiduciary duties to understand their
exposure to climate-related risks and mitigate these risks accordingly. However,
upcoming disclosure requirements go beyond this and require the reporting not
only of climate-related risks but also impacts – activities that produce negative
externalities for society or the environment. In these cases, there may be an
incentive to downplay or minimise the extent of such activities.
This has potential implications for the role of data assurance in green finance.
Demand, and therefore growth, might be lower for data assurance services
provided to this sector. There might be a need to stimulate demand, which could
take the form of mandating specific formal types of assurance (for example
certification against agreed standards).
We think it will be important for the government to monitor demand and
uptake of assurance services and take steps to stimulate demand if
necessary.
Maintaining quality
For reasons similar to those outlined in the section above, it may also be the case
that quality requirements for assurance in green finance might be lower. As a
consequence, there might need to be a greater role for public or regulatory
involvement in assurance of data for green finance, compared with the assurance
of data for other sectors and use cases.
This could involve more tightly regulating assurance providers and
standards-setting bodies: for example, requiring that firms providing these
services subscribe to mandatory standards. It could involve regulators themselves
having to carry out certain assurance responsibilities, if it is found that private
providers are failing to do so to the requisite standard.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance23

Short of this, and using their current powers, regulators could engage in ‘softer’
forms of intervention, such as the setting of best practices and publication of
guidance, or the integration of data assurance into existing regulatory activities. In
order to drive adherence to these best practices, regulators couldcollaborate with
industry or professional bodiesto offer certificationschemes or to accredit other
organisations to do so.
We believe that there is a need for policymakers, the governance profession
and regulators to work together to shape and maintain quality in assurance
services for green finance.
Costs and benefits of assurance
Whether through mandatory requirements, incentives or provision of services,
implementing data assurance for environmental performance reporting will mean
that costs associated with environmental performance disclosure may initially
increase. Areport by the Climate Risk DisclosureLab at Duke Universitypublished
in 2021 found that most companies expected audit and assurance services to be
the main cost driver associated with the introduction of new disclosure
requirements.
However, empirical evidence has shown that, at least in some cases, mandating
assurance of non-financial disclosures can bring economic benefits to individual
firms. It is reasonable to assume that increasing the trustworthiness of
sustainability disclosures should enable the most sustainable firms and asset
managers to differentiate themselves from less sustainable competitors and
attract investment.Research conducted recently inTaiwan, where mandatory
assurance was introduced for Corporate Social Responsibility disclosures,
supported this, finding that mandatory assurance had the effect of reducing the
cost of debt capital for firms.
Beyond the costs and benefits associated with individual firms and investors,
there are also benefits to the wider economy that need to be factored in. Assuring
that sustainability disclosures are accurate should enable the government, civil
society organisations and the private sector to better understand the impacts of
economic activities on the environment, and thus improve decision-making aimed
at reducing climate change related impacts. Moreover, asa report commissioned
to Frontier Economics by the ODIshowed, increasingtrust in data ecosystems has
the effect of increasing the economic value generated by data in the long term. By
increasing the trustworthiness of sustainable disclosures through assurance that
they use reliable data and are created by following adequate data practices, data
assurance should increase the value created from this data over time.
We think it will be important for any interventions aimed at embedding data
assurance in green finance to assess – and, if necessary, aim to reduce – the
additional costs of embedding assurance, while at the same time weighing
these against the short-term and long-term economic benefits of a
trustworthy green finance sector.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance24

Future-proofing the assurance of data for green
finance
Finally, we believe that several challenges will need to be addressed in the coming
years if data assurance is to be successfully embedded in the green finance
sector.
Data gaps and data holes
Although in many cases the data requirements for sustainability disclosures are
clear, and the data itself is available, there remain manydata gapsanddata holes
– instances where there are limited frameworks or guidance about what data is
needed – that need to be filled:
●
Data gapsare instances in which reporting frameworksexist but datasets
are not adequately populated. A recent report byTheFuture of
Sustainable Data Alliancefound that important datagaps still exist,
including for energy consumption and production by source, emissions of
GHG, executive pay and board composition. These are all included in
existing reporting frameworks, but the data to populate them is not always
available.
●Data holesare instances where there are limited frameworksor guidance
about what data is needed. These are often emerging topics that society
is trying to tackle through ESG disclosure, but which are not yet captured
by available reporting frameworks. These include risks and impacts on
biodiversity, and issues associated with supply chain reporting. In both
cases, there are still pending challenges on formulating indicators and
standardising reporting.
Data assurance activities, such as third-party audits, could play an important role
in discovering and fixing these data gaps and data holes, for example by
highlighting specific examples of where a disclosure or type of disclosure is not
underpinned by the necessary data.
We think it will be important for regulation to reflect the constructive role
data assurance can play in helping to discover and fix data holes and gaps.
Alternative sources of data
It could be possible to fill some of these data gaps and data holes through the use
ofalternative data: data from new and unique sourcesused by investors to help
evaluate a company or investment. Alternative data includes vast amounts of
non-standardised and unstructured data that takes significant time and
investment to properly make use of. The quality and limitations of the datasets
being sold in the market today are often not known by alternative data users until
this investment has been made.
There are many sources of alternative data – from web traffic and public records,
to surveys and weather reports – but they can be broken down into three broad
types:
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance25

●
Data about individuals,such as data on consumer sentiment from social
media and citizen-generated data.
●Data about business processes,like using web-scrapedjob postings to
gain insights on company hirings.
●Data from sensors,such as from private aeroplaneflight trackings to
help discover potential deals between companies.
Data assurance activities can help to ascertain whether new or alternative sources
of data are being used properly to fill data gaps and data holes in environmental
performance reporting, providing confidence in their use.
We think it will be important for the government to consider how data
assurance practices can help to improve confidence in alternative data.
AI assurance
Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are typically used at the insight creation stage of
the data value chain, to create more sophisticated analyses and insights from
data. Financial institutions, investors, ratings agencies and individual companies
are increasingly using forms ofAI modellingto produceinsights into climate risks
and externalities.
AI assuranceis related to, but distinct from, dataassurance. AI assurance is
defined by the Centre for Data Ethics and Innovationas services which ‘help
people to gain confidence in AI systems by evaluating and communicating reliable
evidence about their trustworthiness’.
Data assurance is a necessary condition for AI assurance: data is used to train and
use AI systems, so AI assurance requires confidence that the data supplied is
trustworthy and collected ethically and equitably. Beyond the assurance of the
training and input data, AI assurance will involve other elements such as
assurance of the AI models being used and of the instructions provided to these
models by human operators.
AI assurance, like data assurance, will have a role to play in ensuring sustainability
disclosures are both trusted and trustworthy.
We think it will be important for the government to consider green finance as
a key use case for AI services and therefore AI assurance, as it continues to
develop and roll out the support for the sector outlined in theAI Assurance
Roadmap.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance26

Data institutions for environmental performance data
Data institutionsare organisations that steward dataon behalf of others. They
make decisions about who has access to data, for what purposes and to whose
benefit, to realise the value and limit theharm thatuse of data can bring.The
relative importance and number of data institutions – some of which are referred
to as data intermediaries or data-sharing services – is increasing as we require
data for various use cases to be aggregated from multiple sources.
Many existing data institutions steward data that is or may become relevant to
green finance.The Data Institutions Register, developedand maintained by the
ODI, includes a list of 30 data institutions working with climate data, including:
●
iNaturalist, a citizen science project which empowerspeople to document
biodiversity and share images of flora and fauna.
●Globe at Night, an international citizen science campaignto raise public
awareness of the impact of light pollution by inviting citizen-scientists to
measure and share their observations of the brightness of the night sky.
●Sensor.Community, a network of individuals with DIYair quality sensors.
The community pools data about air quality from all over the world to
create an open environmental dataset.
●TheEnergy Data Co-op, being developed by Open DataManchester and
Carbon Co-op, where people can pool and share data to improve the
efficiency of their homes by changing how energy is used.
These institutions could potentially play a role in stewarding environmental
performance data that is relevant for ratings providers and regulators, as well as
for investors and asset managers wanting to make better informed decisions. Data
institutions can play a role both in setting standards and in making data from
statutory disclosures accessible in ways that allow third parties to evaluate and
compare information across different companies and products.
Recent research carried out by the ODI with GPAI and Aaptihas set out the
potential for data trusts – themselves a type of data institution – to help tackle the
climate crisis. There could be a role for data trusts and other types of other data
institution in stewarding new and alternative datasets relevant to green finance.
There are a number of ways the government can consider intervening to build trust
in emerging data institutions, as outlined in arecentODI report.
We think it will be important for the government to understand the role data
institutions can play in stewarding environmental performance data, and
consider how they can intervene to build trust in such organisations.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance27

Next steps
The ODI has carried out this project to explore what data assurance for green
finance could look like, and how it can help to tackle the threat posed by
greenwashing. It forms part of our ongoing programme of work ondata
assurance.
We will continue to actively investigate these issues, and are interested in hearing
from others working on this topic across industry and civil society. If you’d like to
stay informed about our work in this area, provide feedback on this draft report, or
get involved as a project partner or collaborator, we’d love to hear from you!
This report is published as an open draft for comment – please feel free to add
your thoughts, reactions and commentary directly.
Alternatively, you can get in touch with us by emailing the ODI’s Policy team at
policy@theodi.orgor by filling out the contact formon ourproject page.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance28

Appendices
Appendix 1: Disclosure requirements in the UK
Environmental performance reporting is increasingly a legal requirement, with
eight jurisdictions including the UK, EU and Japan having introduced
environmental disclosure requirements aligned with standards set out by the
G20-founded Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) as of
September 2021.
The UK government sees the disclosure of whether products are sustainable or
not as a vital mechanism for ‘greening’ the financial system: by ensuring that
‘decision-useful’ information on investment sustainability is available to financial
market decision-makers; those decision-makers can then factor sustainability into
their investment choices.
The Greening Finance roadmap published by the Treasury in 2021 outlined the
steps that the government will take to make this a reality:
1.The implementation of Sustainability Disclosure Requirements (SDRs)
from April 2022 onwards.
2.Further mandatory disclosure requirements introduced by 2025,
incorporating the UK Green Taxonomy and ISSB issued standards.
From April 2022: Sustainability Disclosure Requirements (SDRs)
From April 2022, newSustainability Disclosure Requirements(SDRs)will come
into force, placing new responsibilities on investment products, for corporate
actors, and for asset managers and asset owners.
SDRs will cover both information that can have a material impact on investors’
interests (transition risks and physical risks), and information on how firms impact
the environment (negative and positive externalities).
Based on standards developed by theG20 Taskforceon Climate-related Financial
Disclosures, SDRs will require the disclosure of informationaround four pillars:
1.Governance: governance arrangements around sustainabilityrelated
risks, opportunities and impacts.
2.Strategy:actual and potential implications of sustainability-relatedrisks,
opportunities and impacts for businesses.
3.Risk management:the processes by which risks, opportunitiesand
impacts are identified, assessed and managed will also have to be
disclosed.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance29

4.Metrics and targets:metrics and targets used to assess and manage
risks, opportunities and impacts, as well as the performance against these
targets, and relevant supporting information.
By 2025: The UK Green Taxonomy
TheGreening Finance roadmapalso details the developmentof the UK Green
Taxonomy, with additional disclosure requirements based on this taxonomy set to
be introduced in the coming years. Taxonomies have already been developed in
jurisdictions around the world including the EU, China, Malaysia, Bangladesh and
Russia. The UK taxonomy will build on these existing taxonomies, focusing on net
zero in the UK context.
The aim of the UK taxonomy is to ‘clamp down on greenwashing –
unsubstantiated or exaggerated claims that an investment is environmentally
friendly - and make it easier to understand how a firm is impacting the
environment’ by ‘clearly defining which economic activities count as
environmentally sustainable’.
Taxonomy-related disclosures will provide information on how firms impact the
environment (negative and positive externalities). For an activity to count as
taxonomy-aligned, it will need to meet the following criteria:
1.Make a substantial contribution to one of six environmental objectives:
a.Climate change mitigation
b.Climate change adaptation
c.Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources
d.Transition to a circular economy
e.Pollution prevention and control
f.Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems
2.Do no significant harm to the other objectives.
3.Meet a set of minimum safeguards, based on the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights.
Appendix 2: Data assurance
At the ODI, we definedata assuranceas:‘the process,or set of processes, that
increase confidence that data will meet a specific need, and that organisations
collecting, accessing, using and sharing data are doing so in trustworthy ways.’
As detailed in Table 3, assurance activities can help to improve user confidence in
a range of attributes associated with data and datasets – such as data
provenance, discoverability and quality – as well as data practices – such as
strategy, governance and user support.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance30

Table 3: What data and data practices can be assured?
You can provide assurance for several aspects of data and data practices, for example:
Data and
datasets
to improve confidence that:by performing activities such as:
data is of trustworthyprovenancechecking individual data points to assess
their accuracy; verifying the sources of
data, including those that may come
from third parties
data has beenethically sourcedreviewing a dataset to ensure it does not
contain personal data
data is of appropriatequalitychecking the structure of a dataset
against a standard to confirm that it is
well-formed and complete
Data
practices
to ensure:by performing activities such as:
data can beeffectively usedby relevant
decision-makers
ensuring that those involved in data
practices have the necessary skills and
knowledge to work with data
data is shared with the right peopleassessing the decision making for how
data is shared, to ensure that it is shared
responsibly and in ways that will
minimise harms
there are no harmful impacts on people,
organisations and communities who the
data is about, or who are affected by use
of the data
reviewing the lifecycle of how data is
collected, managed and shared to
confirm that data is managed legally,
securely and ethically
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance31

Formal and informal data assurance activities
Data assurance activities can be classified based on how formally they are defined
and applied.
More formalassurance activities include processessuch as audits, certification or
accreditation schemes. They are described and supported by well-defined
standards and involve multiple layers of review and assessment; not just of the
process itself, but the people and organisations involved in it.
Less formaldata assurance activities include developingand applying norms and
principles that might help to guide and reinforce trustworthy behaviours. But their
application may only be loosely defined and the results are not verifiable. In
contrast, more formal data assurance activities typically follow well-defined
processes and produce verifiable outputs.
Table 4: What types of data assurance activities are there?
What is assured?Less formalMore formal
DataGuidance on use of modelling
and design of data
Provision of data
documentation or data licences
Quality control
Validation against agreed standards
Data practicesDeveloping skills
Building professional, social or
organisational norms
Developing shared principles
and best practices
Conducting audits of data processes
and governance
Certification of organisational
processes against predefined
standards
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance32

Who is responsible for data assurance?
The assurance ecosystem extends to actors beyond the immediate environment of
organisations creating and providing data, and those consuming data from third
parties. This wider ecosystem includes:
●
Providers of data assurance. These organisations canbe found across
different sectors of the economy, and they vary in size, although the
majority of firms currently providing data assurance services were
incorporated in the last 10 yearsand employ fewerthan 10 people each.
Public bodies such as regulators can directly provide data assurance
services, although they are more likely to play amarket-shaping role.
●Governments, regulators, researchers and advocacy organisations.
These other actors help to create policies and legislative frameworks that
guide how data is accessed, used and shared; provide guidance, support
and influence to encourage and enable others to behave in certain ways;
or develop the tools and technologies that support their activities.
●Standards development organisationssuch as the BritishStandards
Institutions (BSI), Office for Product Safety and Standards, National
Physical Laboratory and theUnited Kingdom AccreditationService. These
organisations help to develop and maintain the standards that describe
how a product or service should operate (core standards), the standard
processes by which a data-enabled product or service might be certified
against that standard, and standard training and assessments that are
used to accredit organisations to complete these certifications.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance33

Glossary
Assurance: the process, or set of processes, thatshow evidence that something
is reliable or trustworthy.
AI assurance: the process, or set of processes, thatincrease confidence that AI
systems work as they are supposed to work, and that they are effective,
trustworthy and legal.
Climate-related risks:potential negative impactsof climate change on an
organisation. They can either be transition risks, which are financial risks
associated with the transition to a lower-carbon economy, or physical risks, which
are related to the physical impacts of climate change.
Data assurance: the process, or set of processes,that increase confidence that
data will meet a specific need, and that organisations collecting, accessing, using
and sharing data are doing so in trustworthy ways.
Data assurance activity: a specific activity to createtrust in data, such as
conducting an audit, validating a dataset, or carrying out training.
Data assurance scheme: a specific project that worksby applying one or more
data assurance activities and may involve multiple actors.
Data ecosystem: data infrastructure and the people,communities and
organisations that benefit from the value created by it.
Data institutions: organisations whose purpose involvesstewarding data on
behalf of others, often towards public, educational or charitable aims.
Data practices:the processes by which data is collected,shared,
held and/or managed.
Data value chain: the set of activities that createimpact from data. At the ODI, we
consider that the data value comprises three activities: stewarding data, creating
information from that data, and deciding what to do based on that information.
Disclosure: the action of publishing information abouta company’s activities,
financial performance, exposure to risks and other aspects relevant to its
operations and current and future performance.
Environment: the surrounding on which a company orfirm operates. It includes
everything that is not within the company boundaries but can be impacted or
affected by its activities.
Environmental performance: effects of business activitiesand products on the
natural environment, which can be assessed in relation to development goals or
policy objectives such as net zero.
Environmental performance data: data about the effectsof business activities
and products on the natural environment.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance34

ESG: company reporting framed around three key factors: environment, social and
governance. The first covers how organisations impact and are impacted by
climate change and broader environmental issues. The second includes factors
such as labour conditions, and impact on development. The third one refers to
information about the way a firm is controlled and directed.
Green finance: an approach to the financial systemthat aims to align financial
flows with the goal of achieving a low-carbon world. In 2019, the UK government
published a Green Finance Strategy, which set out policy commitments to help
align UK financial flows with a low-carbon world, by supporting the financial
services sector to align with environmental goals and by mobilising finance to
support clean and resilient growth.
Greenwashing: the action of making misleading or unsubstantiatedclaims
about environmental performance of businesses, economic activities or
investment products. It can lead to wrong investment and buying decisions,
misallocation of capital intended for sustainable investments, and the
undermining of trust in the market.
Mandatory Sustainability Disclosure Requirements:requirements announced
by the Chancellor in July 2021 that aim to create an integrated framework for
decision-useful disclosures on sustainability across the economy. They cover
three types of disclosure: corporate disclosure, asset manager and asset owner
disclosure, and investment product disclosure.
Physical risk: climate-related risks that may havefinancial implications such as
damage to assets, supply chain disruption, changes in resource availability or
quality, among others. According to the TCFD guidance, physical risks can either
be considered acute when they are event driven, or chronic when they relate to
longer-term shifts in climate patterns.
Quality infrastructure: formal mechanisms of assurancesuch as standardisation,
conformity assessment, measurement or accreditation.
Sustainability Disclosure Requirements (SDRs): newrequirements for
corporate, asset managers and owners, and investment product disclosures that
will create an integrated framework for decision-useful disclosures on
sustainability across the UK economy. They build on the UK’s TCFD
implementation and its first measures will come into force in 2022.
Standards:documented, reusable agreements that solvea specific set of
problems or meet clearly defined needs. Data standards are often used to help
define or support a data assurance activity.
Taskforce on Climate Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD): an organisation
created in 2015 by the Financial Stability Board of the G20 to develop consistent
climate-related financial risk disclosures for use by companies, banks and
investors. It published its final recommendations in June 2017.
Transition risk: financial or reputational risks associatedwith the transition to a
lower-carbon economy and the policy, legal, technology and market changes that
it requires or will require.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance35

Trustworthy data ecosystem:an environment in which individuals and
organisations across the public, private and third sector trust that data is flowing
in ways that will maximise benefits whilst minimising harms.
UK Green Taxonomy: a common framework to determinewhich investments and
economic activities are considered by the UK government to be environmentally
sustainable. The government expects to have a Green Taxonomy legislation in
place by the end of 2022.
EU Taxonomy: a classification system, establishinga list of economic activities
considered by the EU to be environmentally sustainable.
Open Data Institute | June 2022 | Tackling greenwashing through data assurance36