



Contents
Foreword3
Executive summary6
Background9
Data access and innovation in regulated sectors10
Data access and innovation in the banking sector12
Data access and innovation in the accounting sector12
Data access and innovation in the legal sector13
User research findings14
People insights from market research14
Process insights from market research15
Technology insights from market research18
Recommendations20
For data intermediaries20
For data providers21
For government, regulators and industry bodies22
Appendix 1: Methodology23
Appendix 2: Additional Resources26
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           1

About
This report was researched by the Open Data Institute (ODI) and commissioned by
RegulAItion. The project is funded by UK Research and Innovation through theNext
generation services challenge. It was published inJuly 2021. The lead authors are
Josh D’Addario and Arindra Das, with input from Olivier Thereaux, ODI.
To share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact the ODI, atinfo@theodi.org, or
RegulAItion, atcontactus@regulaition.com
Find information on the data access programme here.The aim of this competition
was to speed up the responsible adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) and data
technologies and solutions in the accountancy, insurance and legal sectors by
enabling better access to data. UK Research and Innovation will invest up to £3.5
million to this effect.
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from
the community in the comments.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           2

Foreword
by Sally Sfeir-Tait, RegulAItion CEO
The fourth industrial revolution is upon us
1
. Governmentsunderstand this deeply
2
and
have devised strategies to support the transformation of their economies
3
. If they do
not, they risk seeing their existing industries replaced by technology providers, likely
located in other countries
4
.
All sectors are experiencing a fundamental transformation. Technology products and
services are testing the traditional boundaries of technology and financial and
professional services. This is mostly apparent in the context of Big Tech with
companies like Alibaba, Tencent, Alipay
5
, Google,Facebook and Amazon
6
. This has
prompted the coining of a new term, TechFin
7
, andthe development of numerous
studies on the impact
8
of technology companies deliveringfinancial services
9
and the
fundamental questions we must consider
10
.
Many in the traditional industries of financial and professional services still believe
that transformation is happening in the ‘other’ sectors, not in theirs. While some
believe that transformation has already happened and that they are too late.
A few, who have taken the time to understand existing disruptive technologies know
that they are masters of their own destiny. By leading the transformation, they ensure
that they secure new revenue opportunities for their organisations and seize
operational efficiencies today
11
. We, atRegulAItion,are lucky that these individuals
and the organisations they represent have chosen us as partners.
They have chosen theAIR Platformto deliver accessto information as they build a
new knowledge management infrastructure to support all of their digital
transformation initiatives.
The challenge we are all facing today is one of language and communication. We
hear talk of ‘data access’, ‘data sharing’, ‘data availability’, ‘information sharing’,
'knowledge management’ and many more expressions and terms that all relate to the
same subject: managing the increasing volume of knowledge we are all individually
and collectively creating. How do we work together to gather and coordinate the
knowledge we have and use it to serve our collective and common interests?
11
Mckinsey (2018), ‘AI has the potential to deliveradditional global economic activity of around $13 trillion by 2030’
10
European Banking Institute Working Paper Series 2017- No. 6 (2017),FinTech to TechFin: The
Regulatory Challenges of Data-Driven Finance
9
Institute of International Finance (2018), ‘A newkind of conglomerate: Bigtech in China’
8
Financial Stability Board (2019)
‘
BigTech in finance:market developments and potential financial stability implications
’
7
My Tech Mag (2020), ‘FinTech vs. TechFin: Where isthe Future Headed?
’
6
Amazon providing credit to merchants on its marketplace,Google’s tie up with CitiBank to provide
account services and Facebook’s pursuit of launching its own cryptocurrency.
5
Institute of International Finance (2018), ‘Bigtechin China’
4
HM Treasury (2017),Regulatory Innovation Plan
3
UK Research and Innovation (2021), ‘Next GenerationServices Grand Challenge’
2
GOV.UK (2017), ‘Growing the artificial intelligenceindustry in the UK’
1
WE Forum (2016), ‘The Fourth Industrial Revolution:what it means, how to respond’
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           3

The global pandemic has shown that sharing knowledge can be existential to human
life and to our economies. The UK government is deeply aware that an infrastructure
approach to knowledge management is essential. TheNational Data Strategyhas the
potential to confer a unique advantage to the UK, helping to drive innovation, meet
ambitious policy goals, secure trade deals, address systemic risk and create a new
competitive advantage on the world stage.
Multiple technologies and solutions are coming to the rescue. How do we decide
which technologies to adopt and why? That’s why this report is so important. It
shares knowledge about the state of the industry and recommends actions in a clear
framework that can be followed by businesses, regulators, governments and industry
bodies to improve how we access information and share knowledge in regulated
sectors.
This is an important and timely message. Breakthroughs for humankind have, after
all, always come about through sharing and collaboration. Sharing of knowledge
dates back to the earliest cave paintings. Societies evolved by communities working
to create a common purpose. As we now face new frontiers, it's time to reimagine
how we share and work together.
Imagine a world where intelligence can be quickly unlocked in order to overcome
complex health, economic and environmental challenges. Where competitors can
safely work together to achieve common goals.
That is the future each and every one of us at RegulAItion and the ODI can see. It is
the one we all want to live in. And this report is crucial in bringing us one step closer
to it.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           4

Executive summary
Trustworthy and sustainable data access is the underpinning factor of any healthy
data ecosystem. This is true in regulated environments where data is particularly
sensitive, privacy and confidentiality are enshrined for the main players, and the
reputational and financial risks regarding compliance are high.
The Open Data Institute (ODI) and RegulAItion, funded by Innovate UK’s Industrial
Strategy Challenge Fund, worked together to explore the landscape of access to data
across the regulated sectors of banking, accounting and law. In particular we
researched how innovative privacy enhancing technologies (PETs), and developments
in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) could improve trustworthy and
sustainable data access across these sectors.
Historically, the sectors of banking, accounting and legal have been relatively change
resistant when it comes to deploying data access technologies, with much of their
technological investment focussed on data privacy and security instead. This is for a
number of factors, chiefly that confidentiality and trust are crucial elements of the
services provided. In fact, as an industry expert said during our research, “trust is the
main product accountants sell”.
Despite this deeply embedded culture of privacy and risk aversion, there has been
some notable progress. The most substantial and public example has been in the
finance sector with the implementation of open banking – a data portability initiative
intended to empower banking consumers with greater control over data about their
finances, and to reduce the market power of the UK’s nine largest banks. The
accounting and legal professions have not had such a seismic policy change, but
have been investing in ML and AI technologies to augment the skilled work of
professionals in these fields. Organisations including The Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) and LawtechUK are leading in innovative
research and development in their respective sectors.
There is now an opportunity for more data innovation across these sectors that would
have been unlikely even a few years ago. Findings from our research show that these
changes can be seen in three interconnecting ways: capacity building in people,
improvements in processes, and advancements in technology.
People in these industries are more positive about data innovation than ever. The
increasingly hi-tech demands of clients, and the growing influence of internal
champions, have pushed these sectors to reevaluate desired skills. This has led to
both an increase in data scientists and other data roles (including ethics and strategy)
within established businesses, and increased comfort with bringing in data and
analytics companies to perform important functions when there is not the required
expertise internally.
Processes for improving data access and sharing towards innovative ends have gone
hand-in-hand with technological advancements. Although the need for highly secure
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           5

and privacy-preserving activities remains as strong as ever, there have been pushes
for more open innovation processes. Examples include hackathons, data challenge
series and open forums for sharing best practice and learnings in trusted
environments.
Technology has been a key enabler across these changes. The explosion in PETs
over the last decade has fuelled trust in more open systems, and created increased
demand for data science capabilities to deploy these technologies. From
anonymisation techniques, to sandbox environments and synthetic data, to
algorithmic privacy techniques like federated learning, PETs are driving data
innovation across these sectors.
Although large organisations like multinational finance firms are investing a lot in
people, processes and technology in-house, a relatively new role has emerged that is
also well placed to provide these solutions to the market, the data intermediary.
Intermediaries facilitate the access to data and information across data ecosystems.
This is often done by collating disparate datasets in a central location and vetting
providers and users of that data. New developments in PETs such as federated
learning are also allowing intermediaries to increase information flows in an
ecosystem without ‘raw’ data ever being accessed or shared. This new generation of
intermediaries, includingRegulAItion, is creatingvalue within their ecosystems
without direct data access, improving security, privacy and data governance. When
data intermediaries securely facilitate valuable data and information flows in a sector,
they help to build a more open, trustworthy and sustainable data ecosystem.
In order for the regulated data ecosystems of the banking, accounting and legal
sectors to further realise the benefits of data innovation, through better products and
services, improved consumer outcomes and easier legal compliance, data access
needs to be improved. Data intermediaries have an important role to play in this, but
everyone with a stake in the ecosystem needs to play their part.
Data providers should convene an ecosystem of partners, suppliers and customers to
explore ways to increase access to data that will create business benefits, while
respecting privacy and minimising potential harm. Running or participating in
innovation programmes and accelerators or academic partnerships can be a safer
and more trustworthy way of experimenting with data. Partnering with intermediaries
that can create value while minimising data exposure can help build secure,
trustworthy and sustainable data access models.
Governments and regulatory bodies should fund research and innovation
programmes that will help to facilitate data collaboration to deliver value within
specific sectors and ensure that any data accessed or shared as part of regulatory
changes is made as open as possible within the appropriate considerations toward
security, sensitivity and privacy. Professional associations and industry bodies should
convene businesses within their networks to help map out current and future data
ecosystems that will unlock value for all participants
Greater data collaboration between data providers and data intermediaries within the
banking, accounting and legal sectors will create more sustainable and trustworthy
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           6

data ecosystems, ultimately driving greater value to businesses, consumers and
wider society.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           7

Background
Trustworthy and sustainable data access is the fundamental factor of any healthy
data ecosystem. Our research into thevalue of datasharing in the private sectorhas
demonstrated that more data flowing through a business ecosystem creates benefits
for data users, data providers and beyond.
12
Increaseddata access canimprove
market reach,identify market insightsandoptimisesupply chains. But withouttrust,
data users will not access data that could otherwise further their goals; and without
financialsustainability, that access eventually driesup.
This is especially true in the regulated sectors of banking, accountancy, and law
where data is very sensitive, and regulation and compliance are very strict. In these
data ecosystems, we see that data flows are restrained both internally and externally
due to the needs of legal compliance and fears of breaching regulation. Strict data
protection and industry regulation can be a solid platform for ethical innovation in this
space that would allow for a more dynamic ecosystem without reducing security and
privacy or increasing harm.
One reason for improving access to data is to create value through innovative new
technologies. As highlighted in ‘Growing The ArtificialIntelligence Industry In The UK’
by Professor Dame Wendy Hall and Jérôme Pesenti, increased use of AI can bring
major social and economic benefits.
13
With AI, computerscan analyse and learn from
data with higher accuracy and speed than humans alone. AI could improve efficiency
and performance in many sectors, including banking, accounting and legal.
Professors Hall and Pesenti identified that in order to acquire these gains,
organisations must improve access to data by:
●
Facilitating the sharing of data between organisations holding data and
organisations looking to use data to develop AI through proven and trusted
frameworks and agreements, which would ensure exchanges are secure and
mutually beneficial.
●
Improving the availability of data for developing AI systems. Government
should ensure that public funding for research explicitly ensures publication
of underlying data in machine-readable formats with clear rights information,
and open wherever possible.
●
Supporting text and data mining as a standard and essential tool for research
by establishing by default that for published research the right to read is also
the right to mine data, where that does not result in products that substitute
for the original works
In line with the trends identified in this paper, RegulAItion was launched in 2018 to
help unlock intelligence by reimagining the way in which organisations across the
13
GOV.UK (2017), ‘Growing The Artificial Intelligence Industry In The UK’,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/652097
/Growing_the_artificial_intelligence_industry_in_the_UK.pdf
12
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Report: Sharing data to create value in the private sector’,
https://theodi.org/article/report-sharing-data-to-create-value-in-the-private-sector/
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           8

globe access data, without sacrificing privacy or security. RegulAItion’s AIR Platform
blends advanced federated learning, encryption, blockchain and AI techniques to
change the way data is accessed in the regulated sectors. It is developing the
technology infrastructure and ecosystem for scalable, automated, repeatable and
responsible AI-driven data access, by enabling travelling algorithms to spot patterns
in data without datasets needing to leave their secure premises.
To better understand this burgeoning market, the ODI and RegulAItion embarked on a
research project across these sectors, exploring the needs, barriers andopportunities
related to data access and sharing through AI and ML-based PETs. Our goal was to
review existing situations or problems and explore industry knowledge around
working with these types of data access and sharing.
This report includes some brief snapshots across the sectors in scope, the user
research findings organised by People, Process and Technology, and
recommendations for different organisation types across the sectors.
Data access and innovation in regulated sectors
Every business is subject to regulation governing how it collects, uses and shares
data.
UK businesses, regardless of industry, need to comply with data protection laws,
such as the Data Protection Act, as well as requirements to report health and safety
data, pay equality, etc. Specific industries are also subject to regulation and laws that
require them to collect and share data with regulators.
For example, businesses across the UK financial services industry need to share
financial data with the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). The Financial Reporting
Council (FRC) is responsible for regulating auditors, accountants and actuaries,
receiving data from them during audit periods. Legal services in the UK are regulated
by a variety of organisations, including the Bar Standards Board in England and
Wales, and different organisations for Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Regulatory compliance is necessary for companies to continue operating within their
industry; though this is sometimes portrayed as an unwelcome obligation, the need to
comply with regulation can be an opportunity to re-engage with customers and to
drive innovation.
As we noted in our case study ‘The value of sharingdata in regulated environments’
in 2020, businesses share data both for regulatory purposes and more widely for their
business.
14
Beyond being a legal requirement, regulateddata sharing often creates
benefits for the organisations that share the data, as well as others in their industry
and consumers. Often the most value is created when organisations take anticipatory
actions or are ‘first movers’ in a newly regulated space, taking advantage of new
14
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data in regulated environments’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-in-regulated-environments/
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           9

opportunities with limited competition, and demonstrating commitment and
trustworthiness to regulators and the wider community.
Data intermediaries have been helping build and grow these data ecosystems for
years. They provide a range of services much needed by data providers and not
found in-house, predominantly technical, but also networking and advocacy services
to ecosystems.
15
Regulators have an active role to play as well. They are well-situated to help improve
how data is used in their sectors and ecosystems by setting norms and standards or
supporting data flows.
Three aspects of data infrastructure that are particularly important for supporting
innovation, and where regulators could have a role, are:
●
access to data – who gets to use it and what for, which might include
identifying when data within a sector should be open, or who should be able
to access data that is not open
●
data governance – what policies and practices there should be to minimise
harms and improve trust in data
●
data standards – how to ensure that data can be combined in flexible ways,
and is interoperable
Organisations like the Better Regulatory Executive (BRE) are focussed on finding the
right combination of regulatory interventions to protect and empower citizens while
supporting innovation. Its paper ‘Regulation for thefourth industrial revolution’
includes a number of commitments to improve access, governance and standards
across regulated sectors.
16
The UK is in a strong global position to deliver on the benefits of more
innovation-driven regulation through improved access to data. It is currently ranked
first out of 37 countries across aggregate indexes of both primary and secondary
legislations in the OECD Regulatory Policy Outlook, fourth in the Global Innovation
Index, and joint first among 30 governments that have made concrete commitments
to champion open data.
Organisations within the UK’s banking, accounting and legal sectors have already
begun making significant moves to both improve data access and invest in innovative
technologies like AI within, and across, their sectors.
Data access and innovation in the banking sector
A major driver of data access and innovation in the UK banking sector over the last
few years has been the implementation ofopen banking,and, with expansion into
16
GOV.UK (2019), “Regulation for the Fourth Industrial Revolution”,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/regulation-for-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/regulation-for-t
he-fourth-industrial-revolution
15
Web Foundation (2015), “Open Data Intermediaries: Their Crucial Role”,
https://webfoundation.org/2015/08/open-data-intermediaries-their-crucial-role/
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           10

open financeand the widersmart dataecosystem planned, this trend is expected to
grow. Open banking is a data portability initiative designed to increase competition
and innovation in the UK’s banking market by allowing individual and SME bank
customers to securely share their data with third parties so a broad range of
businesses can compete to provide bank customers with better financial services.
17
Access to the increasing volumes of this data available through open banking has
resulted in an accelerated use of AI and machine learning to create new propositions,
such as in credit applications,
18
chatbots and personalfinancial managers.
19
Open
banking and open finance driven AI may further improve operational efficiency
through automated and autonomous decision-making and insight creation.
20
Another area in the wider finance landscape where data sharing, AI and data
intermediaries are proliferating is in alternative data for investing, or ‘alt data’.
21
Alt
data refers to new, non-traditional types of data, used to inform investment decisions.
This may be data about individuals such as footfall data, data about business
processes such as credit card spend at retail stores, and data from physical sensors
or satellites.
22
These new data sources generate lots of unstructured data but it is difficult to analyse
its value or combine it with other alt data and traditional investment datasets. ML
processes are being deployed to decipher the potential value of this data.
Data access and innovation in the accounting
sector
Data is also central to the work done by accountants and auditors. Although much of
the data that is still used today in these processes is not digital, there have been
significant advances in data access and innovation with the knowledge that this can
help accountants deliver more value to businesses.
Accountants and auditors have many opportunities to use different sources of data
and new analytics tools. Accountants are increasingly drawing on real-time data and
non-financial data to drive cost analysis and forecasting, while auditors use data
analytics to identify outliers and exceptions, and focus on the areas of greatest risk.
23
This uptick in access to non-traditional data to be combined with traditional sources
will continue to improve these analytics as PETs allow for greater access to sensitive
financial data.
23
ICAEW (2019), “Big data and analytics: the impact on the accountancy profession”,
https://www.icaew.com/technical/technology/data/data-analytics-and-big-data/big-data-and-analytics
22
ODI (2020), “Building trust in alternative data ecosystems”,
https://theodi.org/article/building-trust-in-alternative-data-ecosystems/
21
ODI (2020), “Alternative data: exploring the ethical implications”,
https://theodi.org/article/alternative-data-exploring-the-ethical-implications/
20
Euro Banking Association (2021), “Artificial Intelligence in the era of Open Banking”,
https://www.abe-eba.eu/thought-leadership-innovation/open-banking-working-group/management-summ
ary-artificial-intelligence-in-the-era-of-open-banking/
19
Dulcit.AI (2021), “Conversational AI”,https://www.ducit.ai/#conversationalai
18
Lexology (2020) “Open banking, ‘big data’ and AI: what are the implications for the financial services
sector?”,https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=688a8145-bb2b-46c6-bcb1-6af52c6e961e
17
Open Banking Ltd. (2019) “Open Banking, Preparing for lift off”
https://www.openbanking.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/open-banking-report-150719.pdf
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           11

ML techniques have existed in accounting and auditing for some time but widespread
adoption across the sector is still in early stages. Industry leaders are still developing
a full understanding of how AI can solve accounting and business problems.
Organisations like the ICAEW have identified areas with fruitful early research and
implementation projects in the areas of coding accounting entries, improving fraud
detection, forecasting revenues and analysing unstructured data.
24
Data access and innovation in the legal sector
Lastly, the legal sector also provides a wide variety of opportunities for data access
and AI. While legal services have been traditionally characterised as a relatively
conservative market, new technologies, or LawTech, are disrupting the market as law
firms have adopted new technologies to reduce litigation costs, improve court system
efficiency and drive broader innovation. Currently most LawTech solutions focus on
routine and administrative work, however investments are being made to achieve
more fundamental transformations using ML and AI.
25
The main market drivers for improving privacy-preserving access to data and AI
solutions are the need for greater efficiency, increasing workloads and complexity of
work, increasingly ‘tech savvy’ staff and greater client pressure on costs and speed.
26
This field is still less mature than other adjacent sectors such as financial
technologies (fintech) where there is more funding and regulatory alignment. Within
the legal sector the B2B market is the most mature, particularly within large law firms,
with adoption of AI/ML applications in areas like legal analytics, project management
and compliance and contract management.
The UK continues to invest in this space as a growth sector, increasing funding for
collaboration between businesses and researchers, AI-based PhDs, and more. Most
recently the University of Oxford launched a government-funded research programme
to explore the potential and limitations of using AI in support of legal services.
27
27
Thomson Reuters (2019), “Legaltech Startup Report: A Maturing Market”,
https://legalsolutions.thomsonreuters.co.uk/en/trends-insights/reports/legaltech-startup-report-2019.html
26
The Law Society (2019), “Lawtech Adoption Research report”,
https://www.lawsociety.org.uk/en/topics/research/lawtech-adoption-report
25
TheCityUK (2019), “Legal Excellence, Internationally Renowned: UK Legal Services 2019”,
https://www.thecityuk.com/assets/2019/Report-PDFs/294e2be784/Legal-excellence-internationally-renow
ned-UK-legal-services-2019.pdf
24
ICAEW (2018), “Artificial intelligence and the future of accountancy”,
https://www.icaew.com/technical/technology/artificial-intelligence/artificial-intelligence-the-future-of-accountancy
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           12

User research findings
From October 2020 to April 2021 we engaged in user research using a variety of
structured and semi-structured interviews and roundtables to collect views on the
opportunities and challenges around data access and sharing, PETs and the use of AI
and ML in regulated sectors, with a focus on the banking, accounting and legal
sectors. User research participants included banks, accounting firms, legal services
providers and legal departments, regulators and government, industry bodies and
technology policy organisations.
We have organised the findings according to the ITIL framework of People – including
skills, attitudes and culture, Process – including organisational approaches,
frameworks and policies, and Technology – including technological solutions
deployed internally and services purchased externally.
People insights from market research
Low sector maturity in ‘open culture’ and innovation champions
There are a number of deep rooted barriers that often hold large organisations back
when it comes to data access. These include privacy, trust, transparency, commercial
and ethical concerns. Perhaps the largest of all is a human resistance to change.
Our research has identified the importance of ‘champions’ within organisations.
Individuals who aren’t afraid to challenge the status quo and are keen to push new
innovations. These champions tend to have a background in or familiarity with
technology as opposed to many of their colleagues. Often, champions from different
firms will use networks and competitions to share ideas and best practice, and look
for opportunities to develop pilots or case studies to build an internal business case
for an innovation project.
There are a variety of organisations providing these services across the different
sectors, including Innovate Finance in banking, the Tech Faculty at the ICAEW and
DFK International in accounting, and LawtechUK in the legal sector. This process
yields results, but can still be a difficult approach to push sector-wide innovation, as it
is primarily based on the energy and availability of these select champions, without a
robust data strategy at the organisational level supporting them.
Customer influence on infrastructure
Low ‘open culture’ maturity within organisations is an issue on the business side of
the relationship, as customers, primarily of larger and older organisations, tend to be
less interested in, and more resistant to, trying new products and services. It is crucial
that the benefits of new services are clearly explained and quantified in order to help
large organisations invest internally and build external partnerships.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           13

Research participants from a traditional bank noted that product and service
innovation was much easier for challenger and digital-native banks due to their
customer base. These banks attract customers who are less risk averse to trialling
new financial products, typically away from traditional banks, which gives these
challenger banks insight into how to drive customer value through new services.
Firms in the accounting and legal industry are also somewhat dependent on client
preferences and market behaviours, which can limit their decisions around technical
infrastructure. This can manifest in not wanting to use new solutions, such as
aversion to cloud storage and computing, or preferring email over new access
protocols. Conversely, when customers are keen to try new technologies, or are
undergoing a digital transformation themselves, this affords accounting and legal
service providers opportunities to experiment.
Nascent investment in AI/ML proficiency in large organisations
Larger commercial organisations and data providers are only beginning to invest in
in-house AI and ML technical proficiency. This is currently happening in dedicated
innovation teams as the wider organisation is not yet sure about the tradeoff between
risks and benefits. In some organisations this can drive the perception that they are
not yet ready for AI/ML solutions.
Technology skills underpinning AI/ML solutions, such as cloud capabilities and data
analytics, are present in most large organisations, but have not been mobilised for
use in AI and ML. There is a real opportunity to develop these skills across the
industry, particularly in medium-sized organisations that tend to be lacking these
capabilities, as there has not been a significant client push factor.
In the absence of in-house skills, both large and medium-sized organisations may
outsource the needs of AI/ML solutions on a case-by-case basis. These
organisations may also enter innovation challenges, or trial different collaborations in
order to gain access to these capabilities and help understand their value.
There is also a need for non-technical ML skills such as those related to data and AI
literacy, ethics and governance. Large organisations, especially in the finance sector,
have been investing in this space through hiring third parties to help perform these
roles and train staff, as well as using available tools and methodologies to improve
their own practices and principles.
Process insights from market research
Privacy, confidentiality and data management processes
Most organisations across banking, accounting and legal need to follow an extensive
system of compliance and control to move data or provide access rights, often with
multiple gatekeepers in every step that may differ across organisations. This occurs
between firms, but also within firms crossing multiple jurisdictions or within firms
spanning multiple sectors, such as accounting and advisory. Companies spanning
multiple jurisdictions and sectors are looking for ways to improve the legal sharing of
insights and information across jurisdictions without moving data.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           14

Organisations have multiple roles to carry out different data responsibilities. For
example, a data protection officer (DPO) in a banking organisation would typically be
responsible for data flow within the organisation, while data access needs are met by
the information assurance team and customer ‘know your client’ (KYC) data is
managed by the compliance team.
In the legal sector confidentiality is paramount and seen as highly restrictive to data
flows and innovation. In our roundtable co-hosted with LawtechUK, ‘owing
confidentiality to clients’ was ranked the top risk to data access and sharing. Despite
this, many participants intimated that the catch-all of confidentiality was not always a
helpful term and can often be used to avoid seeking challenging yet rewarding
solutions. Participants agreed that there would be value in reviewing and stratifying
confidentiality within the industry in order to make data and information more
accessible, and derive benefits such as operational efficiencies, new services and
cost savings from it.
‘One-size-fits-all’ access models
Organisations in regulated sectors tend towards a one-size-fits-all data access
approach based on the strictest privacy and security requirements in the
organisation. It is often the simplest approach to complying with regulation in a
complex data landscape, with high penalties for mistakes. This over-compliance is
often seen as an excuse to avoid unwanted actions.
Many stakeholders believe that varying data access policies based on sensitivity of
the data and privacy requirements could improve efficiency in data innovation
internally and externally. However, individuals leading efforts to adapt the access
model often lack the buy-in and resources to create a powerful case while contending
with a strongly-mandated compliance department.
Participants mentioned that when this pain point is voiced at industry-wide forums
and in peer networks, it is often met with widespread acknowledgment as a common
issue. Coordination at these events, which lack a specific purpose or commitments
from attendees aligned with this topic, often does not progress much further than
relationship building.
Expanding and overlapping peer networks
Many research participants discussed how they as individuals or their organisations
were likely in multiple mission-driven peer networks and industry organisations, in
order to seek benefits from greater innovative collaboration. Networks such as
Innovate Finance, Tech Nation and DFK International brought together innovation
champions and provided a forum for them to engage in greater collaboration.
However as mentioned above, these collaborations often lacked significant
organisational support.
Participants still appreciated the benefits of these industry bodies, and especially
their overlap with the ‘official’ government-licensed networks such as ICAEW, The
Law Society and UK Finance. They believe these linked networks provide
opportunities for beneficial partnerships that could result in improved data
collaboration and innovation.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           15

Technology-forward departments and partnerships
Proof points in more digitally savvy parts of the business, or innovation trial
partnerships are being used to make the case for more investment in digital skills,
processes and technologies. Sometimes this produces clashes between traditional IT
functions against innovative teams, but other times, champions within those
traditional IT functions will use the success of internal experiments or third-party
partnerships to make their own cases internally.
Industry bodies and regulators also collaborate with innovative startups in different
ways. Some through incubation programmes, such as ICAEW helping grow, regulate
and later invest in for-profit company Engine B to provide greater interoperability in
the audit and accounting sector. Some through funding research, such as FCA
becoming a soft collaborator in RegulAItion’s AIR platform, and helping develop a use
case for the market.
Banks involved in the open banking ecosystem typically partner with startups to
deliver new solutions that drive benefits for their customers. Participants from a
traditional bank discussed the idea of being able to start a challenger bank connected
to the traditional bank. Such an initiative would allow for greater freedom in
experimentation and could be a ‘proof point’ for the traditional bank and its more risk
averse customers.
Innovation programme and challenge popularity
Innovation programmes are popular amongst regulators, data providers and data
intermediaries as they provide a good vehicle to experiment with new services, build
partnerships and build topic awareness.
They often provide low risk environments for innovation as the data is usually either
synthetic or compliant with regulations. Investments in the programmes and
challenges are also lower risk investments, due to the relationship building, coaching
and marketing that comes with it.
As an additional benefit, organisations, especially data intermediaries, from
predominantly different sectors often participate. This allows for a cross-pollination of
ideas, techniques and technologies from different sectors.
Non-technical standards for data
In our research onopen standards for data, we notethat besides technical standards
for data such as file formats and data models, non-technical standards for data are
important to consider as well. These non-technical standards include codes of
practice and importantly, terminology.
Organisations across banking, accounting and legal use different terms such as ‘data
sharing’, ‘data access’, ‘data transfer’, and rarely consistently. Broadly speaking, data
sharing is perceived as something done externally and involves data leaving a
boundary, whereas data access is more internal and data is seen as not moving.
In many cases, including most day-to-day discussion, inconsistent terminology is not
an issue. However in heavily regulated areas where legal and regulatory compliance is
foregrounded, terminology can break down more open data processes due to fears
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           16

that misunderstanding will lead to a legal or compliance breach. Some organisations
are trying to mitigate this uncertainty by creating publicly available glossaries, being
clear about their language to smooth out these processes.
Technology insights from market research
Low adoption of AI/ML technologies
As reflected above regarding AI/ML skills, organisations have had a low adoption of
AI tools and ML algorithms.
‘The Kalifa Review of Fintech’ echoed the sentiments of many research participants,
that ‘deep expertise in artificial intelligence, data and machine learning are in short
supply within the UK.’
28
Plans to address this includeretraining and upskilling adults
to meet the needs of UK fintech by ensuring access to short courses from
high-quality education providers at low cost.
In the meantime however, large firms are starting to invest more in the digital and
data capabilities needed for proper AI/ML adoption. This includes data science
departments, and ensuring that AI ethics is an internal priority.
Experimenting with privacy-enhancing techniques
In order to test and implement new data innovations, organisations use a variety of
anonymisation and privacy-enhancing techniques on testing and modelling data. In
general, organisations are open to multiple PETs but focus on those that make it
easiest to share while retaining quality and privacy.
Banking organisations and regulators have primarily used synthetic datasets for
machine learning modelling and trialling, preferring this method for ease of sharing
and good fidelity overall. Federated learning algorithms are also being deployed to
help develop use cases focussed on regulatory compliance and combating financial
crime.
Use cases being developed in the accounting and legal sectors have so far focussed
primarily on developing federated learning solutions for use cases involving unquoted
company valuations, and decisions on legal advice respectively.
Use of third-party providers (TPPs)
Accounting and law firms use TPPs to manage data externally and internally, using
the default audit functionalities and inheriting the access rules accordingly. There is
an appetite for the use of external partners to provide data management services.
An underlying reason for this is the prevalence of legacy systems that create
blockages and bottlenecks for lots of internal development. Participants noted that
legacy systems are more likely to get updated when there is external pressure,
generally from a business case or partnership involving data access and sharing.
28
Gov.uk (2021), “The Kalifa Review of UK FinTech”,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-kalifa-review-of-uk-fintech
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           17

Open banking partnerships have also shown the value of TPPs in delivering
innovative new services outside of traditional bank core offerings. These partnerships
span from price comparison and micropayment services, to personal finance
managers that use increasingly sophisticated algorithms to improve customer
financial health.
Sandboxes and scaleboxes
Innovation teams within regulators and large data providers are often unable to get
access to as much data as they want in order to run innovation experiments with
external partners. In order to work around this barrier they have implemented
sandbox technology to provide a safe environment for developers to work on new
propositions.
Both the FCADigital Sandbox Pilotand theOpen BankingDirectory Sandboxhave
been cited as examples of regulator-provided sandboxes that provided useful
experiences to their partners that they would not have been able to access otherwise.
The success of the FCA pilot has led to an extension of the programme both in length
and scope. The FCA has also agreed to introduce a scalebox called a ‘regulatory
nursery’ in order to help scale-ups with growth and securing investment.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           18

Recommendations
Our research has shown that improving access to data generally, and through
innovative privacy preserving means specifically, is anticipated to bring significant
benefits to the banking, accounting and legal sectors.
We see that data providers are interested in AI/ML solutions for data-driven
regulation, compliance and supervision, and that these solutions are being developed
both in-house and by data intermediaries looking to fill gaps in the market, and move
it forward. Equally, government, regulators and industry bodies are encouraging
innovation in this space, proving the lie that innovation and regulation are at odds
with each other, or need to be balanced against each other.
To further explore this area, we have identified a number of recommendations for
different stakeholders within the ecosystem, including data intermediaries and data
providers, and governments, regulators and industry bodies. Unlocking the benefits
of more open and trustworthy data ecosystems will require collaboration across a
range of stakeholders.
For data intermediaries
●
Build partnerships with regulators, industry bodies and data providers. This
will help your organisation demonstrate trustworthiness in the sector, improve
sector-specific knowledge, and help develop common standards (such as
data models, sector vocabulary and PET best practice), which will drive
better data access services.
●
Participate in innovation challenges, ideally sponsored by potential partners.
This will help to test new product ideas, build valuable connections in the
ecosystem and demonstrate the value of product offerings.
●
Run sustainable data access workshops to understand what the best mix of
revenue streams is, specifically looking at subscription fees, membership
fees, and additional or premium services. Open source tools like the ODI’s
Sustainable Data Access Workbookcan help facilitatethese workshops.
●
Run trustworthy data access workshops to understand what the main
signifiers of trust and trustworthiness are in relevant sectors, such as
certification, membership of industry networks and commitments to
openness, such as publishing open access research and open data. Open
source tools like the ODI’sTrustworthy Data StewardshipGuidebookcan help
facilitate these workshops.
●
Produce research and case studies around sector and technology trends.
This will help your organisation to understand the latest relevant
developments in your sector, deliver valuable insights to others in the
ecosystem and improve your trustworthiness to potential clients and
partners.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           19

For data providers
●
Educate users on the new technologies and mindsets required to really thrive
in data economies. Utilising modern technologies to achieve better outcomes
does not happen overnight, it requires organisational and cultural change.
Demonstrate how a mindset shift to secure, privacy-preserving data access
will help to overcome common innovation obstacles and empower teams to
deliver real change, fast.
●
Review current approaches to sharing data, both for regulatory compliance
and for commercial propositions. Explore where new approaches to
privacy-preserving data access and processes like ML and AI could deliver
additional business value. Address internal concerns about the risks of data
sharing, and ensure there are appropriate policies that enable safe and
automated access to data at scale. Understand where a one-size-fits-all
approach is reducing data access and use in less sensitive areas of the
business.
●
Convene an ecosystem of partners, suppliers and customers to explore:
○
Use cases where improving access to data can create business
benefits
○
How to make regulatory compliance more efficient and trustworthy
through data-driven processes
○
Foregrounding data ethics within typical business practices
○
Where common standards, from technology decisions, to data
model, to vocabulary (such as around confidentiality, or data access
vs sharing) could improve data access and interoperability
○
Share best practices and success stories to drive a more open
culture in the banking, accounting and legal sectors
●
Develop a data strategy that will help to improve data governance, develop
the internal data literacy of the business, and promote partnerships with
innovative data intermediaries. Locate and encourage innovation champions
within the organisation that can lead on initiatives within the strategy. Set
measurable objectives to ensure compliance with these goals.
●
Explore the commercial landscape for PETs and AI/ML-driven data access
and innovation. This can be done through individual partnerships with data
intermediaries, running innovation programmes with startups and scaleups,
and funding research and development with academia.
●
Develop an explicit approach to data ethics and AI ethics. Open source tools
like the ODIData Ethics CanvasandConsequence Scanningcan help
illuminate current gaps and opportunities.
For government, regulators and industry bodies
●
Convene businesses, including data providers, data intermediaries and other
technology providers within their networks to help map out current and future
privacy preserving data access arrangements. These could include reusable
data sharing frameworks, sector data institutions, and more openly
accessible metadata on data that cannot be easily shared.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           20

●
Run innovation programmes, like theDigital sandbox pilot: FCA DataSprint,
that will help to facilitate open innovation around data access, PETs, and
AI/ML product development within specific sectors. Data availability
mechanisms should be built into the design and functioning of all such
sandboxes as an enduring regulatory principle.
●
Fund and support work to scope and incubate businesses aiming to develop
PETs to improve regulated data access, that will help organisations within a
sector to share data in ways that will preserve privacy and increase trust
●
Fund research and case studies around the opportunities for PETs and AI/ML
to improve data access in regulated sectors
●
Support the development of legal frameworks, guidance, codes of practice
and training that will help support ethical, legal and trustworthy sharing of
data across a range of sectors. Foreground the development of both
technical and non-technical data skills.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           21

Appendix 1:
Methodology
We took a holistic approach to gathering the existing thought process of industries
involved in the problem space by doing an in-depth exploratory study. Formative
research methodologies were used with divergent (phase 1) and convergent (phase 2)
thinking.
Phase 1 was about exploring the problem and phase 2 was about defining the
problem and figuring out the concrete actions needed to tackle the usage of data.
Our original goal was to interview organisations from the banking, accounting, legal
and insurance sectors. Given the unavailability or unwillingness of stakeholders from
the insurance industry to participate in our research, the insurance sector was
descoped to maintain a robustness of results.
Phase 1/Pilot (Explore the problem)
In this phase, we aimed to start understanding the experience of each participant in
order to identify the range of problems that exist. Desk research (literature review) was
carried out to get a better understanding of the context and semi-structured in-depth
interviews were conducted to understand user pain points, barriers and motivations.
Later, insights were drawn out through using thematic coding data analysis
techniques and organised by People, Process and Technology.
Why was an in-depth semi-structured interview used as data collection?
The primary sources of data collection in formative research are often semi-structured
in-depth interviews. The use of in-depth interviews enables the researcher to explore
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           22

issues with participants through encouraging depth and rigour, which facilitates the
emergence of new concepts/issues and contributes to the ‘richness of data’ required
in the discovery stage. A conversational approach to the interviews was adopted to
get deeper context from the participants.
Phase 2 (Define the problem)
From phase 1, we established a range of insights. We prioritised them to focus on
and explore a few high-value areas that would help define the key directions, uncover
the high-level user needs and identify the riskiest assumptions. To do this we
facilitated roundtable discussions, surveys and structured in-depth interviews.
In phase 1, we observed that the participants were wary about speaking on the
topics of data access and sharing, due to internal compliance and the impact it could
have on reputation. To mitigate the risk of being unable to gather organisations for
roundtables and ensure the study was not compromised, the team designed an
in-depth interview format and survey as a back-up tool to gather any additional
insights.
In general in both interviews and roundtables we employed the Chatham House rule
or simply promised that our findings will not be attributed to individuals or
organisations. This allowed a more open and timely discussion, as many of the
organisations we spoke to have very strict and arduous compliance processes for
publicly attributable statements. Engaging in this process would have reduced the
value and the volume of the insights we gathered.
In addition we sought to design an effective questionnaire for phase 2 by avoiding
biases with questions that were formulated with careful interventions, such as using
probes rather than leading questions. However our results in the questionnaire were
too low to use independently in our final report, and the findings from it have only
been included as part of overall trends in the findings from our research. RegulAItion
intends to deploy the questionnaire in future market research where appropriate.
Research questions
The aim of the research study was to understand the potential of, and barriers to,
data access in the regulated sectors of banking, accounting, legal and insurance in a
way that could both help key stakeholders in those sectors improve data access and
to help understand the viability of RegulAItion's AIR Platform proposition.
The research questions that followed were:
1.
What is the biggest challenge at the moment in the [name of the industry]
industry on how data is shared/accessed?
2.
Can you please list the use cases/business needs that require information to
be shared?
3.
Can you please list the internal process that needs to be taken before
information can be shared? Please be specific about each department.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           23

4.
How are interactions with datasets tracked and audited to reduce the risk of
data misuse?
5.
Is the [name of the industry] industry in some way change-resistance?
6.
How/where is the [name of the industry] industry investing resources in data
processes, people and technologies?
7.
How is the industry keeping up with the latest technological advancement
especially around ML/AI? Do you think this could be improved? How?
8.
What are common misconceptions people have around ML/AI/Data
handling? How can we combat these misconceptions and communicate
more effectively?
9.
How do you communicate as an organisation around ‘data access and
sharing’? What is the common terminology you use to handle data?
10.
What are the challenges around data transfer and management? What are
some of the common processes used industry-wide to comply with
compliance and control?
11.
What does a trusted secure data management platform look like?
12.
How are you enabling people in your organisation to help build digital trust?/
How are you engaging your organisation’s business processes to build digital
trust?
13.
What are the specific security challenges in your industry?
14.
What are the data sharing risks that your industry needs to be prepared for?
15.
What are some of the common data management tools/processes that are in
place in your industry and what are the key challenges?
Exploring these questions provided a landscape view of the role of data in the
regulated sectors.
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           24

Appendix 2: Additional
Resources
ODI resources
●
TheTrustworthy Data Stewardship Guidebook– createdto help organisations
assess, build and demonstrate trust and trustworthiness
●
TheSustainable Data Access Workbook– supports organisationsthat
steward data to make better decisions about revenue models
●
‘Data sharing in the private sector’ – includes casestudies on businesses
gaining value from increasing access to data they hold and asummary report
●
The ODI’sData Toolkit for Business– a set of collaborativetools that will help
businesses unlock the value of data
●
‘Anonymisation and open data: An introduction to managingthe risk of
re-identification’ – introductory guide to consideringrisks around
re-identification
●
Open Standards for Data– a guidebook that helps peopleand organisations
create, develop and adopt open standards for data
●
The Value of Data report– exploring ideas aroundhow to effectively and
ethically tap into the value of data
●
ODI work with partner Refinitiv exploring theethicalimplications of alternative
data, and howdata intermediaries can build trustin alt data ecosystems
●
ODI blog and report onhow far Open Banking has comeone year on
●
TheData Landscape Playbook, which helps organisationsinvolved indata
access initiatives– collaborative programmes thatfocus on addressing
social, environmental or economic challenges by improving access to data –
to prioritise and plan their initial activities to design or strengthen data
infrastructure
Open Data InstituteImproving data and information access in regulated sectors | July 2021           25