



Contents
Contents2
About3
Executive summary4
Introduction7
What are the purposes of interventions in the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector?8
Interventions: areas of focus8
Host behaviour8
Assets/property9
Platforms10
Tools used to manage the impact of peer-to-peer accommodation11
Traditional instruments11
Self-regulation and shared data11
The role of data12
Plans for future interventions15
Broader data policy landscape15
Non-traditional approaches17
Advantages of non-traditional approaches and processes to
developing interventions17
Non-traditional approaches and processes to developing interventions18
Anticipatory18
Cooperative18
Data-driven19
Co-regulation and co-designing policies with users19
Aggregate regulations20
Scaled regulations21
Transferable sharing rights21
Non-traditional or alternative interventions into the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector21
Shared Cities and the Policy Tool Chest21
Methodology and limitations23
Research design23
Limitations24
Next steps26
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data2

About
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and
published in March 2018. Its authors were Leonard Mack, Gillian Whitworth, Lucia
Chauvet, Tom Sasse, Jack Hardinges and Peter Wells. If you want to share feedback
by email or would like to get in touch, contact the peer-to-peer accommodation
project lead Isabelle Champion atisabelle@theodi.org.
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click the
‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page.
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions
from the community in the comments.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data3

Executive summary
Many people use peer-to-peer accommodation services to
decide where to stay, whether to let a room or how to build
a business. To make those decisions, people need data.
Peer-to-peer accommodation services and marketplaces are emerging across a wide
range of sectors and geographical areas. Each day, many consumers, businesses
and communities use them to make decisions such as where to stay when on
holiday, whether to use a service to let a spare room or how to build a business
in popular areas. To make those decisions, people need data.
The Open Data Institute is investigating how data can improve the peer-to-peer
accommodation market to support businesses and communities, and improve
the experience of consumers and users.
Our starting point was to research and understand how national and local
governments have sought to manage the impact of peer-to-peer letting; the issues
they have sought to address; and the tools they have chosen to use. This report
summarises the outputs and conclusions from that preparatory research.
Data must be an inspiration and a resource for innovation. It can enable businesses,
startups, governments, individuals and communities to create more efficient
and effective services and products, fuelling economic growth and productivity.
Interventions by local and national governments can help make this happen.
We assessed35 different approaches to interventionin the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector from around the world and considered the
following questions:
1.
Which approaches are implemented or discussed?
2.
What aspects of peer-to-peer accommodation are addressed and how?
3.
What role does data play in supporting the different approaches?
We learnt that most interventions by local or national
governments used traditional top-down models.
The interventions had four main goals:
●
Prioritising long-term housing (23 cases)
●
Tax collection (14 cases, mostly concerned with tourist/city taxes)
●
Improving service quality (seven cases)
●
Improving health and safety (five cases)
We identified three key areas of regulation:
●
host behaviour
●
asset/property
●
peer-to-peer accommodation platform operators
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data4

We found that platform operators, hosts and public authorities were carrying out data
collection. We found that data was being passed from hosts to platform operators
and then shared with public authorities; this occurred for both personal and
non-personal data. We also found that data was being passed directly from hosts
to public authorities as a result of the interventions.
We also explored a number of ways in which city authorities sought to manage the
impacts of the peer-to-peer accommodation sector in new ways, separate from these
traditional models.
Whilesome organisations published datawe foundno data matching theopen
1
definition.Some of the data was non-personal andcould have been made open.
2
We found that public authorities did not pass data to platform operators and data
was not shared between platform operators.
There are various parts of the broader data policy debate that were not considered in
the local debates and interventions. For example:
●
open-by-default data policies
●
measures to improve free flow of data to increase competition and innovation 
●
individual control over personal data
●
registers of authoritative data, such as contact information for public
authorities responsible for particular services or lists of peer-to-peer
accommodation operators
●
common policy patterns, such as crowdsourcing data
●
policy trials to test assumptions and demonstrate value before
full implementation
As well as supporting immediate needs these areas should also be considered as
part of the prototype development. They may help meet other needs or improve the
effectiveness of current interventions.
The preparatory research summarised in this report sits alongside a broader set of
activities, including: interviews from across the sector – with consumers, local
communities, platform operators, local authorities and central government; three
stakeholder workshops; and  prototype development to test if some of the challenges
we uncover can be improved by better data use.
2
Open Knowledge Foundation (2018), ‘The Open Definition’,http://opendefinition.org.
1
Airbnb Citizen (2015), ‘Overview of the Airbnb Community’,
https://www.airbnbcitizen.com/data.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data5

Introduction
There is ongoing debate surrounding the impacts of
peer-to-peer accommodation platforms and the growth
of the sharing economy more broadly.
Peer-to-peer accommodation can be broadly defined as accommodation – such as a
spare room or an entire home – made available by an existing homeowner for others
to rent, normally for a short period of time.
Peer-to-peer accommodation platform operators – such as Airbnb, LoveHomeSwap,
or Wimdu – have grown rapidly in recent years. Platforms such as these connect
homeowners with people looking for short-term accommodation, providing a secure
environment for transactions. Peer-to-peer accommodation platforms compete with
others in the provision of short-term accommodation, such as hotels and more
traditional forms of short-term letting.
There is ongoing debate surrounding the impacts of peer-to-peer accommodation
platforms and the growth of the sharing economy more broadly. There are clear
opportunities driven by the trend: additional (occasional) income for hosts, cheaper
accommodation for tourists, and more choice. These opportunities are balanced
against fears of rising rents, new challenges for health and safety, effects on
competition, and displacement of local people. In response to these issues,
policymakers have started to respond with a number of interventions.
This report summarises the findings of desk research completed by the Open Data
Institute (ODI) into the range of interventions by national and local governments to
manage the impacts of peer-to-peer accommodation sector. This research focused
on addressing three research questions:
1.
Which approaches are implemented or discussed in the context of
peer-to-peer accommodation?
2.
What aspects of peer-to-peer accommodation are addressed and how?
3.
What role does data play in supporting the different approaches?
This research forms part of the discovery phase of a project designed to understand
how data can help improve the sector. We will use these findings in combination with
the outcomes of interviews and workshops with a broad range of stakeholders
– including consumers, local communities, platform operators, local authorities
and central government – to inform the design of a set of prototypes.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data6

What are the purposes of
interventions in the
peer-to-peer
accommodation sector?
Our research identified 35 different cases of national and local governments’
intervention in the global peer-to-peer accommodation sector, listed here ina public
spreadsheet.These interventions were analysed todetermine their underlying
3
motivations.We found that most interventions (orproposed interventions) from
4
this sample were based on four motivations:
1.
to prioritise the affordability of long-term housing (23 cases)
2.
to facilitate tax collection (14 cases, mostly concerned with
tourist/city taxes)
3.
to ensure service quality (seven cases)
4.
to support health and safety considerations (five cases)
As interventions generally include multiple objectives, there are often overlapping
motivations (eg in eight cases regulators sought to both facilitate tax collection and
ensure the affordability of long-term housing).
4
The research methodology is described in detail later in this report.
3
The Open Data Institute, (March 2018), #OPEN UKgovRD, Project 4 (p2pa): Policy
desk research sheet
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data7

Interventions: areas of focus
As well as analysing the cases to understand motivation, we also sought to establish
the focus of the interventions. We identified three main areas:
●
host behaviour
●
asset/property
●
peer-to-peer accommodation platform operators
Host behaviour
We found that ‘host behaviour’ was the most common focus of interventions –
specifying what a property owner or host can, must, or must not do when letting
a property on a short-term basis.
5
Restricting the time period of short-term lets was the most frequently used approach
in this scenario. Fifteen cases limited the number of nights per year for letting a
property on a short-term basis (eg a maximum of 120 days in Paris, and Airbnb’s
automatic limiting of entire home listings in Greater London to 90 nights per calendar
year) or prohibited rentals below a certain threshold (eg minimum 31 days in New
York City). In some cases, such as in Geneva, no specific cap was defined, but
applicable laws required that short-term letting remains temporarily limited.
The second most frequent pattern requires that hosts and their properties are
registered with public authorities; alternatively, they may have to acquire a business
licence.This established approach to regulate andmonitor market access was part
6
of the intervention process in 13 cases, nine of which also applied a cap on the
maximum number of nights per year for short-term letting.
Another pattern is to impose a limit which regulates how many properties an owner
or host can rent via peer-to-peer accommodation platforms. We found this approach
in seven cases, but in different forms: Geneva, Berlin and Lazio only allow hosts to
short-term let parts of their primary residence; Vancouver allows short-term lets of
the host’s entire primary residence; San Francisco allows short-term letting of one
property per registered property owner; and Toronto and Seattle allow hosts to let
their primary residence as well as one further unit.
Other forms of intervention on the behaviour of hosts occur less frequently, including:
●
requirements for hosts to comply with minimum service standards, in five
cases (eg welcoming guests on arrival, offering a dedicated phone number
for calls 24/7, or providing bed linens)
6
The specific registration or licensing requirements can however vary; eg a
registration or licence might require regular renewal. In some cases, such as in
Barcelona, Vancouver or the Lazio Region, registrants or licensees must also comply
with certain service, safety, or property quality standards (eg minimum size of rooms,
functioning air conditioning/heating, personal contact numbers).
5
Given how we created data categories, we cannot calculate a simple count in order
to assess what is regulated most frequently. However, the two most frequently
regulated objects fall both under the case of owner/host behaviour.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data8

●
collection of guests’ identity information which is registered in official
databases, observed in three implemented cases and one proposal
●
payment of tourist taxes, explicitly regulated in Bern and Seattle
●
a cap on a maximum gross income from short-term letting in Iceland
of 1 million Krona (ca. £7,200)
Assets/property
In addition to the focus on owner or host behaviour, interventions also set
requirements for the shared asset itself – in this case, the property.
Authorities may require that properties that are let short-term meet certain general
equipment standards. We observed this in eight cases. In the case of Lazio’s regional
law, a property used for short-term letting must not have more than three bedrooms.
In Brussels, the approach included a requirement for a detailed list on how rooms
used for short-term letting must be furnished.
A second, more stringent requirement is that properties used for short-term let meet
minimum health and safety standards. As we observed in six cases, this mainly
includes compliance with fire safety regulations. Vancouver, for instance, requires
that all short-term let properties in buildings with three or more flats are equipped
with interconnected smoke detectors on all floors. These requirements were paired
in all cases with a registration or licensing process, during which hosts had to
demonstrate compliance.
Platforms
Some interventions and proposals also include measures to directly regulate platform
operators. This was the least common approach observed.
TheUK Deregulation Act in 2015and the announcementofa sharing economy tax
7
allowancein the 2016 UK budget aim to foster thegrowth of the sharing economy
8
and peer-to-peer accommodation.
We identified nine cases whereby Airbnb agreed with city authorities to automatically
collect and remit tourist or city taxes.
In some cases, platform operators are required to provide data to public authorities
(the second most frequent requirement). In Lisbon and Lazio, platform operators
agreed to regularly provide city authorities with summary statistics and aggregate
data to help them monitor the development of tourism and short-term let activities.
In Tokyo, Seattle, and Toronto, short-term letting companies must acquire a business
licence to operate in the city. Through the licensing terms, companies are required to
provide public authorities with certain data, such as summary statistics on lettings
and details on individual listings on a case-by-case basis. In Brussels and Vienna,
8
HMRC (2016), ‘Policy Paper: Income Tax: a new allowance for property and trading
income’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/income-tax-new-tax-allowance-for-pro
perty-and-trading-income/income-tax-new-tax-allowance-for-property-and-trading-i
ncome.
7
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (2015), ‘Press Release:
Boost for Londoners as red tape slashed on short term lets’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/boost-for-londoners-as-red-tape-slashed-on-
short-term-lets.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data9

authorities have been equipped with legal powers to acquire data from
platform operators.
In a few cases, interventions focused on platform operators by:
●
requiring platform operators to register their business with public
authorities, subject to further obligations and conditions (three cases:
Tokyo, Seattle, Toronto)
●
making platform operators liable for illegal listings (two cases: Brussels,
Toronto)
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data10

Tools used to manage the
impact of peer-to-peer
accommodation
Traditional instruments
The overwhelming number of cases we investigated applied traditional instruments to
the peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
In 28 of the 35observed cases, governments used traditionaltop-down regulatory
interventions in order to achieve a number of different outcomes. Top-down
interventions impose rules on businesses or individuals, often to restrict unwanted
behaviour, set quality standards, or distribute financial or other resources.
The contents of such interventions can vary widely: in the case of the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector, they may include strict rules which widely prohibit private
short-term letting (such as in Berlin or Geneva),and also rules which allow
9
short-term letting under certain provisions. In London, Paris, and Zurich this means
that short-term letting is permitted for a specified number of days per year and
applicable taxes are paid. While the formulation process of top-down intervention
might be somewhat collaborative (eg through public consultations) they are
nonetheless unilateral in their execution: public institutions create, monitor,
and enforce interventions while businesses or individuals must ensure compliance
(or face penalties).
Self-regulation and shared data
In seven cases, we found that traditional regulatory interventions were supplemented
by self-regulation agreements (ie voluntary schemes led by the sector). In practice,
this means that to enforce existing interventions, platform operators agreed
Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with city authorities, obligating operators
to limit listings to a certain number of nights per year (Amsterdam) or to collect and
remit tourist/city taxes (Genoa, Lisbon, Canton Zug).
In the UK the industry has developed a Sharing Economy UK TrustSeal as a form of
self regulation. The TrustSeal is a set of good practice principles setting out minimum
standards for sharing-economy businesses to ensure that they act with integrity and
maintain professional standards, such as customer help and support.
9
In Geneva, the conversion of private property into commercial property is
prohibited. However, home sharing is not forbidden as it is not considered a misuse
of housing space when the tenant or owner still lives in the apartment, even after
temporary absence.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data11

As part of revised legislation by the Italian Lazio region, which includes Rome,
platform operators will collect information on guests and share this data with
the regional authorities.
However, it does not automatically follow that cooperation between platform
operators and authorities leads to data being published openly or shared with the
local authority. A point of conflict for those city authorities requesting that platform
operators collect tourist taxes is whether they only provide authorities with summary
statistics or with access to detailed accounts. City authorities which are demanding
the latter, such as Vienna, are currently at a gridlock.
From our desk research Airbnb appears to be the only peer-to-peer accommodation
platform which collaborates with authorities in this way.
The role of data
We also focused on better understanding the role data plays in the interventions
we examined.
Data exists on a spectrum of access, based on who can access it and how they are
permitted to use it, as shown below in The Data Spectrum.
The operations of the platform providers, along with associated interventions, create
data, but it is difficult to determine how this data is made available and used. This is
the case even for interventions in cases where platform operators provide support,
for example by collecting and providing the identity of hosts. Our overall impression
is that the data generating aspect of interventions is often overlooked.
We found that platform operators, hosts and public authorities all collect data.
We found data being passed from hosts to plathotel forms and then shared to
public authorities; this occurred for both personal and non-personal data. We
also found data being passed directly from hosts to public authorities as a result
of the intervention.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data12

Thirty-two cases involved the collection of personal data related to the identity of
property owners or hosts. This collection occurred in multiple ways. For example,
through a registration or licensing process with public authorities, or directly through
the platform operators who then pass the data to the local authorities. This data flow
is in the shared part of The Data Spectrum.
In 28 cases, the intervention required property location and host identity data to be
provided to local authorities. This was mostly as part of a registration process with
authorities, rather than through the platform. This data flow also exists in the shared
part of The Data Spectrum. Property location data is also publicly available on the
platforms – guests need to know where properties are to make decisions about
where to stay.
There were no cases where fire safety information is collected by the platform and
passed to the local authority. Information on fire safety equipment within the property
is collected through a registration or licensing process by the local authority in 13
cases. It is not clear if or how this data is presented to renters, who may need it to
help them make a decision on where to stay, or to platform operators, who may
need it to make decisions about which properties should be available to let on
the platform.
In 20 cases, data on the duration of short-term rentals is collected. In most cases,
this is the result of the requirement to pay tourist or city taxes for tourist rentals.
Where agreements with platform operators exist, we believe that these will be
collected as part of the automatic tax collection process. In other cases, such as
Vienna, Bern, or Toronto, hosts are required to handle the tax collection and
processing themselves, eg through quarterly paper forms that they pass back directly
to the local authorities. This data is likely to be less accurate. In all cases the data is
in the shared part of The Data Spectrum.
Eight cases include data collection by platforms to support the collection of
appropriate levels of income taxes. This data is passed from the platform to the
relevant public authority. Two of the eight cases are currently policy proposals.
Only Iceland applies a direct cap on the maximum income generation allowed
through short-term letting. In all other cases, the data on rental income must be
reported by hosts as part of their income tax declaration to the relevant
public authority.
Six cases enforce the collection of guest identity data, including two policy
proposals. In the remaining cases, hosts are obliged to register guests from foreign
countries and share data with local authorities. More general guest statistics are
collected in five cases. These include the collection of summary information to help
develop macro-trends on tourism, eg how many guests stayed in a city or in specific
quarters. This data is collected by platform operators, aggregated and then provided
to the relevant local authority. We could not find examples of this data being
published openly.
Fourteen cases included the collection of a variety of other data, frequently on
compliance with accommodation quality standards. For example, in Barcelona,
a functioning air-conditioning system is a requirement for any property wishing
to be registered with the tourism authorities. As with the data flows for fire safety
equipment we could not determine if this data was also provided to platform
operators or renters to help them make decisions.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data13

Plans for future interventions
To explore emerging models for interventions, we also reviewed proposals for future
policies related to peer-to-peer accommodation.
Our initial expectation was to find proposals for new instruments, possibly with a
stronger angle on using data and technology. However, identifying such examples
proved to be challenging. Despite this – and supplemented with broader research
into other sectors – we have identified some potential approaches that may inform
the peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
Broader data policy landscape
As governments increasingly realise the importance of data in our economies, there is
growing debate around its role in supporting interventions, or alternative approaches
to managing the impact on markets and sectors.
Countries such as the UK are researching the sharing economyand publishing
1011
data to help  make better decisions about whether or how to intervene. This includes
developing methodologies for identifying sharing economy businesses and activity,
and producing economic and other data on activity in the sector.
Many countries and cities have joined theOpen GovernmentPartnershipand
adopted theOpen Data Charter. This commits them todata policies such as
open-by-defaultto unlock innovation, and improvetransparency and public debate.
12
Data should be used to inform the decisions we make as individuals, organisations
and societies. An open-by-default approach could assist by encouraging more data
to be published openly leading to better public debate about the impact of
peer-to-peer accommodation on housing, tourism and local communities.
Geopolitical trading blocks, such as the EU, are recognising that there is undue
friction in the use of data due to the lack of open or shared data. Many are working
to increase thefree flow of datawhile respectingprivacy and creating trust.
13
Open-by-default is a mechanism that supports this direction of travel and so are the
new and strengthened rights being seen in data protection legislation, such as the
EU General Data Protection Regulation, that provide people with more control over
personal data about them. Those rights might provide ways to tackle fears over the
emergence of new short-term let monopolies by making it easier for renters and
13
European Commission (2017), ‘Building a European data economy’,
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/building-european-data-econo
my.
12
Open Data Charter (2015), ‘Principles’,https://opendatacharter.net/principles.
11
UK Government, ‘Sharing Economy: User characteristics and tax reporting
behaviour’.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sharing-economy-user-characteristics-
and-tax-reporting-behaviour
10
Office for National Statistics, ‘The feasibility of measuring the sharing economy:
November 2017 progress update’
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/output/articles/th
efeasibilityofmeasuringthesharingeconomy/november2017progressupdate
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data14

hosts to move between platforms, or support new mechanisms for dispute resolution
by allowing renters or hosts to pass data to relevant public authorities.
Whilst some government responses are of a traditional regulatory nature, for example
the FrenchDigital Republic Billwhich gives governmentthe power to compel some
data to be made openly available, others as using alternative approaches (such as
the UK government's work onregisters).
Registers of authoritative data, such as contact information for public authorities
responsible for particular public services (eg fire prevention or trading standards),
or a list of peer-to-peer accommodation operators, or a list of addresses may be
immediately relevant to the issues presented by peer-to-peer accommodation.
Such registers may provide ways to improve the experience for letters and renters,
reduce the costs of compliance and meet the needs of regulators.
The ODI’s own work onpolicy design patterns thatuse datamay be applicable to
14
the peer-to-peer accommodation sector. For example, crowdsourcing reports of fire
safety issues, and subsequent use of data analytics to target inspection or
understand risk profiles may improve the planning of the location of public resources.
Using peer-to-peer accommodation data in the wider data policy
landscape: building disaster preparedness in San Francisco
Bysharing data with city authorities in San FranciscoAirbnb says that it can
15
help to build the city’s capacity to respond to natural disasters.
Following the platform’s response to Hurricane Sandy in New York City, where
Airbnb hosts opened their homes to those affected by the storm, the platform
began discussions with the Department of Emergency Management in San
Francisco to examine how the bodies might work together to build resilience.
Among other commitments, the government has shared their ‘hazard layer’
data with the platform that identifies areas near potential fires, flood plains
and other risks. Airbnb integrates this information with data about their hosts
and units on the platform, such as location, amount of space and contact
information. Together, this data will help Airbnb employees to pinpoint
appropriate hosts in an emergency.
Airbnb’s cooperation with the city authorities demonstrates how a flexible
approach to intervention might help governments meet their long-term policy
goals. The city government should also consider how to open up hazard layer
data more widely, so that it can be used by others to build resilience in the city
and further afield.
15
Emergency Management (2014), ‘Airbnb Partners with San Francisco, Portland on
Disaster Relief’,
http://www.govtech.com/em/disaster/Airbnb-Partners-San-Francisco-Portland-Disas
ter-Relief.html.
14
ODI (2017), ‘Policy design patterns that help you use data to create impact’,
https://theodi.org/blog/policy-design-patterns-that-help-you-use-data-to-create-imp
act.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data15

Non-traditional approaches
In addition to the interventions examined earlier and the role of data in it, there are a
number of schools of thought emerging around new approaches to the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector.
These schools of thought diverge from the traditionalCommand and Control (CAC)
style of regulationof the style examined earlierin this report. CAC regulation seeks
16
to regulate an object or action (permitted or forbidden), to produce a particular output
(by which the regulation’s success is measured). In this sector, it may include
requirements like host registration or a cap on the number of nights a unit can be
rented. A non-traditional approach, such as the UK’s‘Smart Regulation’ approach
17
to shaping policy, moves away from CAC to viewing regulations as part of a broad
policy cycle (from design to implementation to revision), and promotes a risk-based
approach consulting with sectors affected.
Non-traditional approaches can be separated into two sub-sections:
●
Non-traditionalapproachesandprocessesto developinginterventions
●
Non-traditional or alternativeinterventions intothe peer-to-peer
accommodation sector
These two areas will often overlap, with non-traditional approaches being used to
form new alternative forms of intervention.
Advantages of non-traditional approaches and processes to
developing interventions
Those who favour non-traditional approaches, such asacademic Kellen Zale,argue
18
that the sharing economy has revolutionised the importance of scale in interventions,
meaning the peer-to-peer accommodation sector may not be able to adopt current
models. Zale argues that ‘small-scale activities that once fit the criteria for light or
no intervention are occurring at scales at which non-intervention makes little sense’.
Writer Stephen Millersuggests that transactionsin the sharing economy are
19
different, producing different risks and therefore requiring a different response.
In the UK, innovation foundationNesta has arguedthat the rapid growth of
20
these platforms defy the traditional pattern of waiting for sufficient growth
before intervention.
20
Nesta (2017), ‘Anticipatory Regulation: 10 ways governments can better keep up
with fast-changing industries’,
https://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/anticipatory-regulation-10-ways-governments-can-be
tter-keep-fast-changing-industries.
19
Miller, S. (2015), ‘First Principles for Regulating the Sharing Economy’,
http://harvardjol.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/HLL107_crop.pdf.
18
Zale, K. (2016), ‘When Everything is Small: The Regulatory Challenge of Scale in the
Sharing Economy’,https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2866044.
17
Cabinet Office (2013), ‘Open Government Partnership UK National Action Plan
2013 to 2015’,
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/open-government-partnership-uk-nati
onal-action-plan-2013/open-government-partnership-uk-national-action-plan-2013-t
o-2015.
16
Bussu, S. (2015), ‘The Public’s Voice on Regulation’,
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20170110135609/http://www.sciencewise-
erc.org.uk/cms/assets/Uploads/Public-engagement-on-regulationFebruary2015FINA
L.pdf.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data16

Non-traditional approaches and processes to
developing interventions
Anticipatory
Promoted by innovation foundation Nesta, ananticipatoryapproach aims to assist
21
in the development of new technologies whilst addressing the risks and dangers.
The approach is designed to work in economies where there is rapid change,
emerging ethical issues, and market actors who are dependent on data and
algorithms rather than physical resources. These are all present in the
peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
Anticipatory intervention promotes open dialogue between all parties, especially
between innovators and regulators, to ensure that there are no unnecessary blockers
to technological development. These rules are iterative and continuously adapted to
fit the needs of actors, and encourage the use of testbeds and sandboxes for testing
innovative ideas and identifying likely risks. Furthermore, Nesta has suggested that
public engagement and skills-based training for regulators could produce more
dynamic, effective intervention.
Actors, inside or outside government, have not explicitly adopted this approach in
relation to peer-to-peer accommodation in the UK. However, Nesta has implemented
this approach in drone regulation, where huge potential gains with speed and cost
could be offset by significant challenges regarding data and pricing models.
The foundation has been working in partnership with cities, businesses and
governments in testbeds to explore how authorities and providers could best
pursue opportunities.
Cooperative
Cooperative intervention, put forward in one version byacademic Kellen Zale,
22
is a market-based approach to regulating peer-to-peer activity. Cooperatives are
businesses where members (consumers, workers and producers) ‘own and manage
the enterprise’, limiting profits and reinvesting them back into the business.
Zale suggests that cooperatives could be a market alternative to sharing economy
services by replacing third-party providers such as Airbnb and Uber. Instead of these
services orchestrating a network of small-scale interactions and actors, a cooperative
model would delegate this responsibility to the members themselves, making them
responsible for organising and managing the network in line with local laws.
Organisations who support this model, such asPlatformCooperativism, have
suggested that municipalities could also be involved in setting up and running
these cooperatives.
22
Zale, K. (2016), ‘When Everything is Small: The Regulatory Challenge of Scale in
the Sharing Economy’,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2866044.
21
Ibid.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data17

Data-driven
Academic commentator Arun Sundararajan has been anactive proponentof
23
‘data-driven delegation’, an approach encouraging platform operators and
marketplaces to engage in more self-regulatory activity.
Sundararajan proposes a model that would encourage peer-to-peer accommodation
platform operators to self-regulate in some areas, such as the verification of hosts,
with city authorities supporting as required, such as for disaster preparedness.
Sundararajan opposes‘mandated transparency’whichwould require platforms to
24
share data with relevant authorities, instead suggesting that data should be retained
within companies and selective access granted through an API. He argues retaining
data within companies is more secure and more closely mirrors the interventions
related to companies outside the sharing economy (such as financial audits).
Sundararajan proposes that this approach will encourage platform operators and
marketplaces to become ‘partners in transparency’, making them more likely to help
in inventing self-regulatory solutions that government find difficult to address.
Co-regulation and co-designing policies with users
Co-regulation aims to‘utilise industry to implementregulatory standards’,
25
using industry expertise about the sector and delegating responsibilities to
companies themselves. This approach allows government to focus resources
where outside oversight is most necessary. The process of designing this
approach in collaboration with users is called ‘co-design’.
In 2016 innovation company MaRS Solution Labimplementeda co-design approach
to regulating peer-to-peer accommodation in Canada,working with the
26
Province of Ontario, the City of Toronto and local government to ‘redesign regulation
for the sharing economy’. Bringing together regulators from three levels of
government, industry representatives, insurers, agencies and experts, the company
implemented a five-step strategy to collaboratively design policy through a series of
workshops with the relevant parties.
The strategy included the following five steps:
●
creating a vision matching the city’s identity and strengths that unites
partners across the city
●
mapping the underutilised assets of the city, particularly skills, stuff
and space
26
MaRS Solution Labs (2016), ‘Shifting Perspectives: Redesigning Regulation for the
Sharing Economy’,
https://www.marsdd.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/MSL-Sharing-Economy-Publi
c-Design-Report.pdf.
25
Zale, K. (2016), ‘When Everything is Small: The Regulatory Challenge of Scale in
the Sharing Economy’,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2866044.
24
Sundararajan, A. (2016), ‘What Governments Can Learn From Airbnb And the
Sharing Economy’,http://fortune.com/2016/07/12/airbnb-discrimination/.
23
European Parliament - Economic and Scientific Policy Department (2017), ‘The
Collaborative Economy: Socioeconomic, Regulatory and Policy Issues’,
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2017/595360/IPOL_IDA(2017)5
95360_EN.pdf.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data18

●
identifying opportunities by matching these assets with key issues
the city faces
●
defining actions related to each opportunity
●
supporting the strategy with the right resources and structure
to ensure implementation
The workshops produced a number of pilots that may be implemented, including
a Pilot for Burden Reduction for Existing Operators, addressing the implementation
and enforcement of safety regulation, and Piloting Condominium Regulation Models,
which encourages ongoing and open dialogue among those sharing condos, which
make up almost half of the city’s housing. The workshops also reinforced the
importance of data sharing with city authorities to help with city planning, space
asset management and strengthening understanding of each neighbourhood.
Airbnb is also working with Canadian authorities on a pilot project to raise awareness
about rights and responsibilities when offering or booking accommodation in Toronto.
This includes information about tax laws and regulatory obligations like smoke
alarms, dispensed through a joint website between the Ontario Province and Airbnb.
Aggregate regulations
Recognising the difficulty of focusing on a large number of small-scale interactions,
aggregate regulations address the large-scale impact of a sector. In the sharing
economy space, aggregateregulations have been introducedin Sao Paulo(Brazil)
27
and Washington DC (USA) to regulate ride-hailing companies. In Brazil, ride-hailing
companies are charged bi-monthly upfront fees based on mileage traveled by drivers
in their network, to compensate the city for use of its public infrastructure; in DC,
ridesharing fares include a surcharge that is remitted to the city.
Scaled regulations
Scaled regulations focus on individual actors based on the extent of their activity.
For instance, a scaled fee-based approach may require more active individuals to pay
more to account for the externalities that result from their activity and the increased
oversight required. For instance, the US city of Portland, Oregon charges a minimum
permit fee for home sharing, with those who engage in more frequent rentals required
to pay a higher fee.
Transferable sharing rights
Academic Stephen Miller has suggested atransferablesharing rights framework
28
to provide an alternative method of intervention in the peer-to-peer sector.
This framework builds upon the common process of transferring development rights,
where landowners who are ‘required to maintain a less intense use’ than codes or
regulations allows can sell their unused development rights, allowing a ‘receiving site’
to develop more intensely than is permitted.
Miller has suggested that such rights could be transposed onto the peer-to-peer
sector, allocating transferable sharing rights (TSRs) that allow people to engage
28
Miller, S. (2015), ‘First Principles for Regulating the Sharing Economy’,
http://harvardjol.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/HLL107_crop.pdf.
27
Zale, K. (2016), ‘When Everything is Small: The Regulatory Challenge of Scale in
the Sharing Economy’,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2866044.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data19

in a short-term rental for a given amount of time. Rights could be redeemed on
29
an online platform for a fee payable to the city, with the fee contributing to activities
that neutralise the impact peer-to-peer accommodation activities have on a
neighbourhood. Those who do not want to redeem their rights could sell them to
others through a market brokered by the city, with profits split between the seller
and the city.
Non-traditional or alternative interventions into the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector
Shared Cities and the Policy Tool Chest
In 2016, Airbnbunveiled its new plansfor a ‘SharedCity’ concept. This concept
30
aims to ‘help civic leaders and [the Airbnb] community create more shareable,
more livable cities through relevant, concrete actions and partnerships’
(CEO Brian Chesky). The concept represents the company’s broad commitment
to working collaboratively with city authorities as they update and create legislation
to regulate home sharing, particularly in the United States.
A ‘Shared City’: Portland, Oregon
The first‘Shared City’ partnershipis with the Americancity of Portland,
31
Oregon, and binds Airbnb and the city to the following commitments:
●
enabling Airbnb hosts to contribute to city improvements by donating
money they earn on the platform to local causes, and the company will
match these donations
●
making free smoke and carbon monoxide detectors available to every
host who requests one, helping hosts meet updated safety
requirements of the city
●
working with the tourism bureau, Visit Portland, on joint campaigns
to promote the city and its small businesses
●
collecting and remitting taxes on behalf of the City Council, collected
out of guest payments and sent quarterly to the City of Portland
The ‘Shared City’ concept represents a new model for Airbnb’s engagement with
city authorities, which they aim to scale up over the next years. The partnership
is accompanied by the company’sPolicy Tool Chest,which presents four policy
32
options as a ‘resource for governments to consider as they draft or amend rules
for home-sharing’. The options are:
Tax collection:collecting hotel or tourist tax revenuedirectly from guests on behalf
of the authorities, assuming costs for this collection from hosts or city authorities
32
Airbnb Citizen (2017), ‘Home sharing policy approaches that are working around
the world’,
https://www.airbnbcitizen.com/home-sharing-policy-approaches-that-are-working-ar
ound-the-world/.
31
Gallagher, L. (2014), ‘Airbnb cozies up to cities’,
http://fortune.com/2014/03/26/airbnb-cozies-up-to-cities/.
30
Chesky, B. (2014), ‘Shared City’,
https://medium.com/@bchesky/shared-city-db9746750a3a.
29
Ibid.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data20

who otherwise may have to pay these costs. The company has established
partnerships of this nature, which they call Voluntary Collection Agreements,
in over 200 jurisdictions.
Good neighbours:helping hosts and guests be respectfulof the communities they
stay in, and helping to update zoning laws that may be inappropriate for commercial
activities that now take place across neighbourhoods. An example of this is the
Friendly Buildings program, which encourages building owners, landlords, tenants
and platform operators to get together to enable home sharing under agreed rules.
This has been used in Nashville, Philadelphia and San Jose in the United States.
Accountability:collaborating with city authoritiesto design and implement practical,
enforceable rules for home sharing. The company advertises that its analysts “are
able to assist policymakers with identifying the point at which short-term rentals [...]
generate more income than long-term rentals per year”, helping identify a reasonable
cap. The company has also worked with city authorities in San Francisco and
New York City to implement ‘One Host, One Home’ policies, and a ‘three strikes’
policy that bars hosts who have been cited by law enforcement ‘for violating home
sharing rules or other restrictions intended to preserve neighbors’ quality of life’.
Transparency and privacy: Airbnb is willing to sharedata with authorities ‘to enable
smarter-decision making about home-sharing rules’, whilst respecting privacy. Its
Community Compact, released in November 2015, commits the company to share
the following data openly:
●
total economic activity generated by Airbnb in the city
●
amount of income earned by typical host
●
geographic distribution of Airbnb listings
●
number of hosts who avoided eviction by renting on Airbnb
●
percentage of Airbnb hosts sharing their permanent home
●
number of days typical listing rented
●
total number of guests visiting city, average number of guests per listing
●
their average stay length
●
safety record of Airbnb listings
Beyond this, the company has entered into several data sharing agreements with city
authorities to share data for policy, usually aggregated at the neighbourhood level.
Agreements of this type have been agreed inNew Orleansand Chicago. Notably,
33
open data was published concerning Airbnb activities in each of New York City’s
Neighbourhood Tabulation Areas.
33
Benner, K. (2016), ‘New Orleans Becomes New Model for Airbnb to Work With
Cities’,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/technology/new-orleans-airbnb-model.html.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data21

Methodology and limitations
Research design
Managing the impacts of peer-to-peer accommodation has become an important
topic for policy-makers in areas where it has started to affect the housing and tourism
sectors. But while intervention in the peer-to-peer accommodation market is not
a universal phenomenon, the limited number of interventions already implemented
or discussed makes a comprehensive review very challenging. Furthermore, in
individual countries, many city or regional interventions often follow a nationally
homogeneous approach. This makes them very similar, which limits the marginal
utility of analysing every single case.
34
To maximise the variety of cases analysed, we applied a systems-design approach.
With a limited number of cases, this approach seeks to maximise the variety of cases
analysed, allowing us to gain insights across a broad spectrum of current policy
approaches. We focused our research on 17 developed countries in Europe, North
America, and Asia. All cases were identified through anonymous browsing using
search engines Google and Bing. Ultimately we assessed35 different interventions.
In the five largest cities of each country, we reviewed news reports, policy
discussions, and legal and policy documents from city councils to identify any
relevant activity in the city or whether the topic was discussed at all. Cases were
added to our research depending on whether they added to the variety of the
overall sample.
35
In a second step, a detailed content analysis was conducted. This mapped all
cases along a number of qualitative indicators to understand the type of intervention,
the focus of the intervention (ie its objective), and what data is being collected.
Following an inductive process, we created and coded categories for the different
characteristics we identified through the qualitative desk research. The results of this
coding are discussed in this report.
Non-traditional approaches were researched by using search engine tools to surface
media articles and academic reports into this issue. These were then analysed for
interest and summarised.
Limitations
The observations presented are subject to limitations, resulting from the research
design and the phenomenon we investigated. First, the selective sampling of our
research implies that the results cannot be generalised. In particular, they do not
allow us to draw inferences on specific cases not included in the sample. However,
the patterns we observed can be helpful in understanding the policy and regulatory
35
This implies that cases which largely replicated previously identified patterns were
not added to the database. For example because approaches in different German
cities are very similar, only Berlin has been added to the database as an exemplary
and well documented case.
34
Even though resulting from national legislation, French cities apply a relatively
uniform model, which limits short-term letting to 120 days per year; in a number of
French cities,AirBnB also collects and remits touristand district taxes.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data22

discussions, public concerns, the role of data and technology. Hence, they can be
seen, a) as an assessment of high-level needs (where they have been articulated by
and included in policy designs); and b), as an assessment of the the interventions
made in the peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
Second, intervention in the peer-to-peer accommodation sector is an emerging
phenomenon. Researching it requires an inductive approach, which is grounded in
real-world data. By collecting comprehensive information on a number of issues and
then grouping observations into frequent categories, our research design follows this
grounded theory logic. An important limitation to this exploratory design is that the
resulting categories should not be seen as exhaustive or authoritative. Rather, they
are meant to be informing, based on the characteristics of cases observed.
Particularly the categories we used to structure ‘primary motivations for intervention’,
and what they focus on (‘object’) depend on the specific sample and the motivations
for research.
Another limitation is that the collection of data on interventions is a process of
interpreting the main topics of policy discourses and then encoding the findings into
common groups. Very few interventions clearly state why they were proposed.
To answer our question on the primary motivations for their introduction, we had to
make assumptions based on our readings of policy papers, texts, news reports, and
other online resources. Already this first step is selective, eg because not all relevant
discussions are discoverable online. Deciding which topics were the most important
and then coding them into summary tables introduces two more layers of
assumption. For possible future interventions this is made even more difficult,
as many plans and discussions are unlikely to be made publicly available.
When reading the results, we should thus keep in mind that to condense our real
world observations into neat summary tables, we had to make several consecutive
assumptions. This means that the data presented is “cleaner” than the real world
phenomenon: for example, not recording “managing tourism” as a primary motivation
for interventions in London does not imply that the issue was not a concern at all in
the public discourse. Instead, we just do not think it is important and decisive enough
for the final approach.
Finally, our findings on the role of data in interventions (or proposals) require
particularly careful interpretation. The fact that data is almost never considered in
interventions – and the policy discussions which precede them – is a finding in its
own right.
Few interventions explicitly mention which types of data will be required,
eg when hosts must acquire a newly created business licence to offer a home
on a peer-to-peer accommodation platform. How data is collected, managed,
or processed is extremely difficult to understand without talking directly to
specialist staff at authorities or businesses.
Our findings on the type of data involved in interventions only provide a macroview,
which is heavily based on assumptions about which datacouldbe involved.
In making these assumptions, we have been deliberately conservative: for example,
where properties listed on peer-to-peer accommodation platforms are required to be
officially registered, we can safely assume that at least the name of the proprietor and
the property location will be collected. More data may well be collected, eg on fire
safety installations; but we did not include these sources, unless they were explicitly
mentioned in official documents.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data23

Next steps
This piece of research is part of the overall work that the ODI is currently undertaking
to understand how data can improve the peer-to-peer accommodation market to
support businesses and communities, and improve the experience of consumers
and users.
During a discovery phase (starting in summer 2017), the ODI also completed
interviews with key stakeholders in the sector including platform users, platform
operators, estate agents, renters’ associations, local authorities, fire services, etc.
Based on a combination of this research and the research described in this report,
the ODI established a set of topics, or areas, of opportunity to focus on in the alpha
phase of the project.
Several were tested during workshops with various stakeholders in October 2017.
Based on the feedback received, the ODI will focus on the portability of data related
to peer-to-peer accommodation, establishing whether a data observatory could be
used to understand the impact of the sector, and finding ways for local data to be
shared in a standardised way with hosts and guests.
Open Data Institute 2018Exploring interventions to support the peer-to-peer accommodation sector and the role of data24