

 

 
 
Contents 
 
About2 
Executive summary2 
Introduction4 
Smart cities and open cities4 
The European Commission5 
The Lighthouse Programme5 
Background7 
Who we interviewed and why7 
City profiles8 
Amsterdam8 
Gdańsk8 
Hamburg8 
Helsinki9 
How cities define themselves is ever-changing11 
Shift to openness11 
How cities are embracing openness by engaging with citizens13 
Putting it into action13 
How cities use open data and support a data infrastructure16 
Open data16 
APIs17 
Open source18 
Putting data infrastructure into practice: mobility18 
Putting data infrastructure into practice: environment20 
How cities foster open innovation22 
How cities are encouraging the use of data within city departments24 
How cities are accessing data held by private organisations26 
How cities are acting ethically with the use of data29 
Concluding thoughts: the future of open cities and beyond31 
Refocus to addressing local challenges31 
Increase access to useful data from across the public and private sector
31 
Develop internal skills and motivation32 
Develop relationships between the private and public sectors to enable 
access to data32 
Engage with citizens and technical communities32 
Learn from others33 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report was produced as part of the Open Data Institute’s research and 
development work funded by Innovate UK. The views in this report are those of the 
interviewees and the report authors. 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute and was 
published in April 2020. The lead authors are Ben Snaith and Renate Samson, with 
contributions from Jack Hardinges and Leigh Dodds. 
 
To share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact the open cities project lead, 
Renate Samson​. To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of 
text and click the ‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from 
the community in the comments. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   2 

 
Executive summary  
As part of a three-year innovation programme, the Open Data Institute (ODI) 
undertook a project looking at the opportunity for cities to become ‘open’ as 
opposed to ‘smart’.  
 
Our desk research, outlined in a blog post, uncovered dissatisfaction with, and a 
1
move away from, the language of ‘smart’ in relation to strategies cities were revisiting 
or devising from scratch. We found that it was widely felt that the language of ‘smart 
cities’ was little more than a marketing strategy and that the move towards speaking 
about ‘open’, ‘digitised’, ‘citizen-centric’ and so on was proving to be more desirable, 
meaningful and positive.  
 
We identified a number of European cities that have recently released strategies 
which emphasised the importance of open data, open culture and citizen 
engagement. To find out more, we interviewed representatives from organisations 
working within four European cities – Amsterdam, Gdańsk, Hamburg and Helsinki – 
to understand their approach to ‘open’, what they have done so far and what they 
intend to do in the future. These interviews took place during August and September 
2019.  
 
This report consolidates what we learned from these interviews and offers insight into 
whether these four cities are moving towards a more open future. In turn, we will 
consider how cities are:  
 
●changing how they define themselves  
●embracing openness 
●developing their (open) data infrastructure 
●fostering innovation 
●encouraging the use of data within departments 
●accessing data held by the private sector 
●considering the ethical implications of their use of data and technology. 
 
This report contains a number of insights into how these four cities have become 
more open, which will be relevant to cities of all sizes.  
 
We hope the words of the five individuals we interviewed will help guide cities 
towards a better and fairer future. Achieving this future will not be a smooth process – 
there will be challenges, there will be projects that cannot deliver upon their desired 
impact, there may be promises in strategies which go unfulfilled. But by adopting an 
open culture and sharing lessons learned, cities around the world can help each other 
along this journey.  
 
The movement of cities towards a more open future – where open data, open 
innovation and civic engagement leads to the fairer and more effective use of 
1
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Smart cities are decades away: but open cities are cities are within reach’, 
https://theodi.org/article/smart-cities-are-decades-away-but-open-cities-are-in-reach/  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   3 

 
technology – is encouraging and we hope the progress continues. If we can 
champion these cities, we hope we can stimulate others to follow.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   4 

 
Introduction  
Cities, and their wider metropolitan areas, have a huge bearing on the functioning of 
global systems. By 2030, 60% of the world’s population are forecast to live in a city. 
2
Cities are often significant centres of culture, history, business and politics. 
Metropolitan areas of over one million inhabitants account for more than half of global 
economic output.  
3
 
City governments are responsible for managing an elaborate ecosystem of sectors 
and people – in transport, planning, energy, emergency services and more – while 
balancing economic, political and societal pressures.  
 
Cities face a huge array of challenges such as:  
 
●providing sufficient affordable housing  
●stimulating business growth and innovation  
●increasing jobs  
●minimising the causes of climate change and mitigating the impacts  
●reducing crime levels  
●keeping the streets clean  
●managing the transport systems. 
 
This complexity is precisely what makes cities so appealing to technology vendors, 
systems integrators and solution providers, who sell the idea that these problems can 
be solved by the addition of technology to everyday services.  
Smart cities and open cities  
In response to the pressure they are under, city governments are expanding their use 
of data to include movement of people, energy usage, crime statistics, infrastructure 
monitoring, weather conditions, and more.  
 
The collection, storage, analysis and use of this type of data is not new, but smart 
technologies – such as Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, apps or tech-enabled 
services – enable it to happen at a far greater speed and scale than ever before.  
 
At the Open Data Institute (ODI) we advocate for, and support, an open culture. This 
involves data infrastructure that is as open as possible; encouraging data literacy and 
capability for all, and advocating for open innovation. Underpinning these activities 
should be a commitment to increasing the trustworthiness of cities to use technology. 
This means:  
 
●building ethical considerations into how data is collected, managed and used  
●ensuring equity around who accesses, uses and benefits from data  
●engaging widely with affected people and organisations.  
2
 United Nations (2016), ‘The World’s Cities in 2016: Data Booklet’, 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/urbanization/the_worlds_cities_in_2
016_data_booklet.pdf 
3
 CityLab (2011), ‘Why Cities Matter’, ​https://www.citylab.com/design/2011/09/why-cities-matter/123/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   5 

 
At a time where criticism of the smart city movement is becoming more vocal, these 
4
approaches could, and arguably should, be adopted by cities as a way of moving 
away from the strategy of smart first, towards one of open.  
 
As noted, the ‘smart city’ agenda was initially driven by technology companies. It 
then became a major topic in the strategies, reports and commissions of political 
organisations, including the European Commission, the World Economic Forum and 
5
the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). City governments have 
6
subsequently adopted the language and have begun to develop strategies based on 
the context of ‘smart’, with many seeking to be acknowledged as the ‘smartest’ city 
in the world. 
The European Commission 
In order to work from a definition that we could measure cities by, we looked to the 
work of the European Commission, notably the work of the European Innovation 
Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities. In their Strategic Implementation Plan 
2013 they outlined a ‘smart city’ as an environment with:  
7
 
●sustainable urban mobility  
●sustainable districts  
●built environment and integrated infrastructures and processes across 
energy, information and communications technology (ICT), and transport. 
 
These requirements were not solely about technology or smartness. In fact, an 
integral part of this view of smart was that “citizens must... be at the heart of the 
solution”.  
 
Furthermore, the plan outlined the role of data, and indeed openness of data, as 
integral to the good design and implementation of a smart city. It stated that “relevant 
data from public and private sources should be considered ‘open by default’” and 
that “a focus should be put on building applications with a clear added value to 
citizen [sic] to make good use of this data”.  
The Lighthouse Programme 
The Lighthouse Programme was used as the practical vehicle for this agenda. The 
8
programme funded 14 ‘Lighthouse Projects’, with 40 ‘Lighthouse Cities’ and 50 
‘Fellow Cities’. It was hoped that this approach would enable testbeds for innovative 
approaches in areas such as transport and mobility, energy and environment, and 
housing, to be tested in the Lighthouse Cities before attempts were made to replicate 
them in the Follower Cities.  
 
This approach was based on the thinking that cities “are all alike in terms of their 
political economy, culture and governance”. But in reality, cities are complex; they 
9
4
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Smart cities are decades away: but open cities are within reach’, 
https://theodi.org/article/smart-cities-are-decades-away-but-open-cities-are-in-reach/  
5
 World Economic Forum (2019), ‘Unprecedented Global Alliance for Smart City Technology Launched to Counter Growing Tensions’, 
https://www.weforum.org/press/2019/10/unprecedented-global-alliance-for-smart-city-technology-launched-to-counter-growing-tensions/  
6
 Association of South-East Asian Nations, ‘ASEAN Smart Cities Network’, ​https://asean.org/asean/asean-smart-cities-network/  
7
EuropeanInnovationPartnershiponSmartCitiesandCommunities(2017),‘StrategicImplementation            
Plan’, ​https://eu-smartcities.eu/sites/eu-smartcities.eu/files/2017-09/SIP.pdf  
8
 European Commission, ‘Horizon 2020: Smart Cities & Communities’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/inea/en/horizon-2020/smart-cities-communities 
9
 Rob Kitchin (2015), ‘Data-Driven Networked Urbanism’, ​https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2641802  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   6 

 
differ in terms of people, culture, politics and history, which all influence what 
approaches are taken and how decisions are made. The process of tackling issues 
therefore will differ from city to city.  
 
While marketing has encouraged widespread enthusiasm and adoption of ‘smart city’ 
language, the actual impact appears to be minimal. When looking further than 
individual projects using ‘smart city’ branding to denote the use of data and 
technology (which is not the revolution promised by smart cities), it can be seen that 
large-scale implementations, such as Sidewalk Labs in Toronto or Songdo in South 
Korea, are plagued by empty neighbourhoods, complaints of mass surveillance, or 
1011
they are simply not being built at all. 
12
  
10
 CityLab (2018), ‘Sleepy in Songdo, Korea’s Smartest City’, 
https://www.citylab.com/life/2018/06/sleepy-in-songdo-koreas-smartest-city/561374/ 
11
 The Guardian (2019), ‘“Surveillance capitalism”: critic urges Toronto to abandon smart city project’, 
https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2019/jun/06/toronto-smart-city-google-project-privacy-concerns 
12
 BBC (2019), ‘India election 2019: Have 100 ‘smart cities’ been built?’, 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-47025472 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   7 

 
Background 
The open cities project is part of the ODI’s three-year innovation programme, 
13
funded by Innovate UK.  
 
As part of the project, we wanted to understand why European cities have followed 
certain paths over the past decade or so, and we wanted to explore which cities were 
actively championing and developing an open and trustworthy approach in the use of 
data and technology. This period of desk research involved, among other things, 
reading a broad range of literature, as reflected in the bibliography (Annex 1). 
 
The research has been concentrated on cities, but many of the findings can be 
applied to areas of all sizes. The benefits of using data and technology effectively and 
fairly should be felt by rural as well as urban areas.  
Who we interviewed and why 
We wanted to learn and understand the history, strategic approach, challenges and 
opportunities of an open culture in cities that are defining themselves as ‘open’. We 
also wanted to interrogate whether the approach to open data had stretched beyond 
opening up datasets, to gaining access to data from the private sector, which may be 
of value to city governments and their decision making. 
 
We interviewed key figures working in the city government or relevant open city 
organisations of four European cities: Amsterdam, Gdańsk, Hamburg and Helsinki. 
There are other cities in Europe, and beyond, which are also championing the use of 
open data and an open culture, including London, New York City, Barcelona, 
Batticaloa (Sri Lanka), Dhaka (Bangladesh) and Kathmandu (Nepal). 
14
 
Amsterdam and Helsinki are typically regarded as two of the leading European cities 
in the technology space, and we believe their insight into establishing that position 
15
provides an interesting contrast to the rising cities; Hamburg and Gdańsk. The 
approaches to smart and open in these cities all started at different stages, and all 
have different focuses, different pressures, different histories, and have made 
different decisions. But they have all committed to being open or people-focused, 
which makes them all perfect candidates to highlight their journeys towards 
becoming more open.  
 
The interviews provided great insight into how these particular city governments 
think about being smart and open, how they have used data in public services, some 
of the challenges they have faced and some of their aims for the future. 
13
 Open Data Institute, ‘R&D: Open cities’, ​https://theodi.org/project/open-cities/  
14
 World Bank (2014), ‘Planning an Open Cities mapping project’, 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/sar/publication/planning-open-cities-mapping-project 
15
 European Startup Initiative (2019), ‘Startup Heatmap’, 
http://startupsandplaces.com/shm2019-startup-city-brands-highways/  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   8 

 
City profiles  
Amsterdam 
Ger Baron, Chief Technology Officer (CTO) at Amsterdam City Council 
With a population of over 800,000 people, Amsterdam is the largest city in the 
Netherlands. The city council, made up of 45 members from 12 political parties who 
sit for four-year terms, determines the general policies of the city. 
16
 
In 2019, Amsterdam was ranked the third smartest city in the world, according to the 
IESE Cities in Motion Index.  
17
 
The Amsterdam Smart City initiative “brings together proactive citizens, innovative 
companies, knowledge institutions and public authorities to shape the city of the 
future.” Since the initiative’s launch in 2009, there have been over 70 innovative 
18
projects. Amsterdam has also participated in major European Union (EU)-funded 
projects such as DECODE and CitySDK. 
1920
Gdańsk 
Krzysztof Garski, IT Project Manager at City Hall Gdańsk 
Gdańsk has a population of over 450,000 people and is the centre of Poland’s 
fourth-largest metropolitan area. The city council is made up of 34 people who sit for 
four years. The council decides on local laws, budgets and plans.The elected mayor 
21
of Gdańsk has been responsible for initiating activities, such as the city’s openness 
policy. 
 
The Gdańsk 2030 Plus Development Strategy was launched in 2015. One of the top 
priorities in the strategy is openness: “The openness of the process of selecting 
projects for implementation, their hierarchy, and clear, public criteria of their selection 
underlie the idea of an open city, which Gdańsk is beginning to become. Access to 
information, learning and cooperation complement the open nature of project 
creation the process [sic].” 
22
 
An open data portal was launched in 2016, based on ckan, the Open Source software 
that can be used to build data portals.  
 
Gdańsk participated in the EU RUGGEDISED project and is also a member of the 
23
Open and Agile Smart Cities network. 
24
16
 City of Amsterdam, ‘Amsterdam’s City Council’, ​https://www.amsterdam.nl/en/governance/city-council/ 
17
 IESE Business School, University of Navarra (2019), ‘IESE Cities in Motion Index’, ​https://media.iese.edu/research/pdfs/ST-0509-E.pdf 
18
 City of Amsterdam, ‘Amsterdam’s city council’, ​https://amsterdamsmartcity.com/network/amsterdam-smart-city  
19
 Decode Project, ​https://decodeproject.eu/ 
20
 CitySDK, ​https://www.citysdk.eu/ 
21
 Gdańsk City Council, ​https://www.gdansk.pl/en/city-council 
22
 Gdańsk (2014),‘Gdańsk 2030 Plus Development Strategy’, ​https://www.gdansk.pl/download/2016-08/77054.pdf  
23
 RUGGEDISED, ​https://ruggedised.eu/home/  
24
 Open & Agile Smart Cities, ​https://oascities.org/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   9 

 
Hamburg 
Sascha Tegtmeyer, Head of Urban Data Hub Hamburg 
The city of Hamburg, located within the federal state of Hamburg, is Germany’s 
second-largest city, with a population of just under two million people. Its size makes 
it the eighth largest in the EU. The City Hall is the centre of both the local and state 
governments.  
 
In 2019, Hamburg was ranked at 34 on the IESE Cities in Motion Index. In 2014, a 
25
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed with Cisco to become a ‘smart 
city’. Hamburg participated in the MySMARTLife EU programme, alongside 
2627
Nantes and Helsinki.  
Helsinki  
Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts, Program Director of IoT at Forum Virium Helsinki  
Pekka Koponen, Development Director at Forum Virium Helsinki  
With a population of around 650,000 people, Helsinki, the capital of Finland, is the 
country’s most populous city. The City Council has 85 permanent councillors, in 
addition to 85 deputy members. It is responsible for the strategy and organisation of 
the city, as well as controlling the budget and local plans. 
28
 
The city has aspirations to be “the most functional city in the world”. This is 
29
reflected in Helsinki’s placements in smart city rankings for 2019 – fifth by the Eden 
Strategy Institute and eighth in the IMD (International Institute for Management 
30
Development) Smart City Index. The European Commission ranked the 
31
Helsinki-Uusimaa region as the most innovative region in the EU, with Finland being 
ranked the second most innovative member state. This could be due to how, in 
32
Finland, “Nokia created this mindset that we usually take quite a positive approach to 
technology”, according to Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts.  
 
During our interview, Pekka Koponen discussed how the city government is 
empowered to make significant city-wide changes as it “is responsible for almost all 
of the services: education, kindergartens, healthcare, everything”. 
 
Helsinki is part of the ‘Finnish 6 Aika: Six City Strategy for sustainable urban 
development’, as well as participating in the EU-funded MySMARTLife, 
3334
25
 IESE Business School, University of Navarra (2019), ‘IESE Cities in Motion Index’,  
https://media.iese.edu/research/pdfs/ST-0509-E.pdf  
26
 Hamburg Smart+Connected City (2014), ‘Hamburg and Cisco agree on Cooperation’,  
https://www.hamburg.de/smart-city/4311574/cisco-english/  
27
 MySMARTLife, ​https://www.mysmartlife.eu/ 
28
 City of Helsinki, ‘Helsinki City Council’, ​https://www.hel.fi/helsinki/en/administration/decision/council/ 
29
 City of Helsinki (2017), ‘The Most Functional City in the World – Helsinki City Strategy 2017–2021’, 
https://www.hel.fi/helsinki/en/administration/strategy/strategy/  
30
 Eden Strategy Institute and ONG&ONG (OXD) (2019), ‘Top 50 – Smart City Governments’,  
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b3c517fec4eb767a04e73ff/t/5b513c57aa4a99f62d168e60/153205
0650562/Eden-OXD_Top+50+Smart+City+Governments.pdf  
31
 ​ IMD World Competitiveness Center (2019), ‘IMD Smart City Index 2019’, 
https://www.imd.org/research-knowledge/reports/imd-smart-city-index-2019/  
32
 European Commission (2019), ‘2019 Innovation Scoreboards: The innovation performance of the EU and 
its regions is increasing’, ​https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_2991 
33
 6Aika, ‘What is 6Aika?’, ​https://6aika.fi/en/what-is-6aika/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   10 

 
Synchronicity and CitySDK. In February 2019, the Helsinki Chief Digital Officer, 
3536
Mikko Rusama, signed a ‘city to city digital declaration’ on smart cities and data 
ethics, with the London Chief Data Officer, Theo Blackwell.  
37
 
Our two interviewees work at Forum Virium, an innovation organisation owned by 
Helsinki City Council. Forum Virium is “kind of a facilitator and catalyst for the city to 
get better services and for the companies that provide the innovation”. Forum Virium 
can be a “bit faster to be able to get insight... and to hire people”; they can get the 
“first projects rolling and then the city has time to see if it makes sense”. If these 
projects work, that’s great for the city, who can then adopt the services. But, “if it 
doesn’t make sense...the city didn’t spend any resources”. 
  
34
 MySMARTLife, ​https://www.mysmartlife.eu/  
35
 SynchroniCity ​https://synchronicity-iot.eu/  
36
 CitySDK ​https://www.citysdk.eu/  
37
 New Statesman Tech (2019), ‘London and Helsinki CDOs sign digital declaration on smart cities and data ethics’ 
https://tech.newstatesman.com/it-leaders/london-and-helsinki-cdos-sign-digital-declaration-on-smart-cities-and-data-ethics  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   11 

 
How cities define themselves 
is ever-changing 
The academic Ben Green states in his 2019 book ​The Smart Enough City​ that: “The 
age of the ‘Smart City’ is upon us! It’s just that we don’t really know what that 
means.” We asked our interviewees whether they used the language of smart cities.  
38
 
Ger Baron (CTO at Amsterdam City Council) explained that ‘smart cities’ was a term 
that Amsterdam used back in 2008/09. He said that then it was “nothing more than a 
programme to create awareness about the impact that technology would have on 
society.” Since then, things have changed: “the whole idea around smart cities 
obviously has been taken away by a few corporates, putting in billions of a marketing 
budget.” Sascha Tegtmeyer from Hamburg concurred: “I think that smart city is often 
used as advertising.” 
 
Sascha described how in Hamburg they: “don’t talk about smart city... our strategy is 
a digitalisation strategy. So we talk about a digital city, not the smart city.” An 
updated digitalisation strategy for Hamburg is in process of being written, to 
emphasise that the focus is “about the digitalisation and optimisation of public 
services”, and that this can be achieved partly through “good data management”, 
which is “essential for making new and good public services”. 
 
This approach of digital as opposed to smart was emphasised by our interviewees 
from Helsinki as well. We heard from Pekka Koponen that “in Helsinki... open came 
first and smart came later”. Pekka’s colleague, Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts, told us that 
“the city is now busy with its digitalisation programme”.  
 
Ger Baron explained that smart cities are often seen as “put[ting] a sensor in 
something”, whereas a city focused on digitalisation “is about redesigning whole 
processes and the way we work and the way we manage stuff in a redesign 
process”. This has been focused on since 2018, as “when the city council was 
elected, one of the 12 most important topics they addressed was digitalisation.” 
Shift to openness  
While our interviewees distanced themselves from the language of ‘smart’, there was 
significant enthusiasm for the use of openness, digitalisation and citizen engagement 
as ways of talking about their city’s strategy. 
 
Interviewees indicated that there has been a concerted effort to foster an open 
culture through engaging with citizens, using and publishing open data, encouraging 
open innovation, or developing the digital skills of citizens and government workers.  
 
Openness is not in itself new to cities. Many began the move to openness during the 
early 2000s, following a push from citizens and governments to be more transparent. 
38
 Ben Green (2019), ‘The Smart Enough City’ ​https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/smart-enough-city  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   12 

 
Around this time, governments began to enforce freedom of information and access 
to government and public sector data.  
39
 
By 2014, in Gdańsk, transparency had become a mainstream political issue that 
voters cared about. Kris Garski told us that during that year’s elections, ”...one of the 
hot topics was openness of the City Hall. Is the City Hall open towards citizens? Is it 
accessible? Can citizens trust the City Hall?”. The open data programme, initiated by 
the then Mayor Paweł Adamowicz, included a register of expenses and the decision 
to “publish the spendings we make as City Hall daily on the internet... so everybody 
can check what we are spending money for.” This approach led to the city 
developing an open data programme, which we were told also included citizen 
engagement, such as “development of district meetings... public consultation [and] 
civic panels”.  
 
Citizen initiatives in Hamburg led to the creation of a comprehensive Transparency 
Law (‘Hamburgisches Transparenzgesetz’) – a cornerstone of the functioning of the 
40
city. The law requires the government to publish all public data openly, including 
government decisions, statistics, contacts and geographic data. 
41
 
The law was proposed through Hamburg’s petition scheme, which allows residents 
42
to propose ideas through petitions. The law and the push to open data up publicly 
has had a lasting impact on Hamburg, according to Sascha Tegtmeyer: “We opened 
this data to the public, but we also opened this data within the city. That was a big 
step for us to be open, open to others, but also open to ourselves.” 
 
We learned from Hanna and Pekka that Helsinki’s move to open stemmed in part 
from an event called ‘Restaurant Day’. The day was “a kind of guerilla thing” where 
43
“four times a year, anybody can put up a pop-up restaurant and sell food from home, 
or in the parks... it was a citizen initiative, and then the city [which] is seen as very 
bureaucratic, embraced that at the same time... so there was a kind of a change for 
openness, not only on data, but the city was kind of more willing to engage citizens”.  
  
39
 Proposals for a freedom of information law in the United Kingdom were published by the government in 
1997. The Freedom of Information Act was signed into law in 2000. Information Commissioner’s Office, 
‘What is the Freedom of Information Act?’, 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-freedom-of-information/what-is-the-foi-act/ 
40
 Hamburgisches Transparenzgesetz (HmbTG) (2014), ​http://transparenz.hamburg.de/das-hmbtg/ 
41
 Democracy International (2012), ‘Parliament of Hamburg opts for more transparency’, 
https://www.democracy-international.org/parliament-hamburg-opts-more-transparency  
42
 Hamburgischen Bürgerschaft, ​https://www.hamburgische-buergerschaft.de/  
43
 Atlas Obscura (2019), ‘On Restaurant Day in Helsinki, Anyone Can Open an Eatery, Anywhere’, 
https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/restaurant-day  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   13 

 
How cities are 
embracing openness by 
engaging with citizens 
We can see that it is often citizens who stimulate change when it comes to pushing 
for more openness of data. City governments that actively talk to citizens about the 
problems they are facing, getting them to vote on potential solutions, and involving 
them in decision making processes, appear to be taking the right steps towards the 
European Commission’s requests (page 6). 
 
Our interviewees spoke about the emphasis on citizen engagement. Kris Garski in 
Gdańsk said: “For us, openness is a part of smart city, and technology is also part of 
smart city, but the most important is citizen engagement, and improving the quality of 
life in Gdańsk.” 
 
Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts said that in Helsinki “the city government itself, they’ve gone 
very citizen centric” and this is being utilised throughout projects at Forum Virium, 
where “citizen engagement [and] co-creation is very much on the agenda”. In 
practice, Forum Virium “try to share what we are doing and make the agenda we are 
working on more seen in the media. We use words and terminology that are more 
easy to approach for citizens”. It is important that city governments don’t overburden 
citizens with technical jargon terms, but to use language that they can engage with.  
 
The importance of citizen engagement in Gdańsk was summarised by Kris Garski: 
“Most important is engaging people, and not just building solutions to build solutions, 
or building tools just for our [City Hall] purpose. What we would like is to build tools 
that are used by people, or tools that make life in the city easier.” 
 
While our interviewees placed a lot of value on engaging citizens, their methods of 
how differed widely.  
Putting it into action 
Research shows that many cities are struggling to put citizen engagement into 
practice. However, we heard that in Gdańsk, involving people in decision making 
44
processes – through civic panels and participatory budgeting – “makes people feel 
very responsible for every project in the streets”. Civic participatory budgeting has 
been used for the last five years or so, with around 15% of citizens (more than 
50,000) voting in this process. The City Hall has gradually increased the budget over 
the years for the programme, from less than a million euros to €4.2m.  
 
44
 Current Environmental Health Reports (2017), ‘Public and Stakeholder Engagement and the Built 
Environment: a Review’, ​https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40572-017-0159-7 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   14 

 
This approach was pioneered in Brazil in the 1980s, and similar schemes have been 
utilised around Europe. In Paris, for example, 5% of the capital budget is allocated for 
the residents to decide how to spend. It is also in place in major cities such as 
45
Lisbon, Cologne and Rome. 
46
 
The civic panels, championed by Gdańsk’s former Mayor Adamovicz in 2016, are 
“shaped in very close cooperation with local activists”. Over a few days in City Hall, a 
representative 60 citizens – taken from the voting register – are invited to discuss the 
most important city issues with staff from City Hall and topic experts. The aim of the 
47
first panel was to discuss flood preparedness. Subsequent panels have discussed 
48
air pollution, civic engagement and LGBTQ+ rights.  
49
 
Before the meetings, the participants are provided with “all the resources... all the 
documents, our strategy and other resources we have” to maximise meaningful and 
informed participation. These panels have, over time, become more inclusive by 
lowering the participation age to 16 and allowing temporary residents of Gdańsk to 
participate. 
 
In Amsterdam, a suite of interactive open source tools has been developed to 
50
encourage collaboration between residents and the municipality, under the heading 
of OpenStad (‘Open City’). This approach enables citizens, other departments, 
51
organisations or cities to make use of them.  
 
One such tool is ‘De Stem Van’ (‘The Voice Of’), which gives citizens the ability to 
52
upload ideas for the neighbourhood and create polls in order to determine support. 
The plan with the most votes is automatically put on the agenda of the borough 
council.  
 
When new bike stations were needed in Hamburg, the public was asked where they 
should be placed. There were 4,000 suggestions provided for new locations. Such 
approaches are helping the city authority test similar processes to explore the 
development of housing. City representatives engage the public with “all the 
information and data that the administration has... and we also give them tools to do 
this at an event, or at home or online with a smartphone.” Previously, the city did 
much of this “without digital tools, but we are now trying to digitalise all of these 
participation processes”. Furthermore, they are “working on processes to analyse 
this information in a better way.”  
 
In Helsinki’s first smart city district of Kalasatama, the city “managed to engage 
two-thirds of the citizens... in their workshops and co-creation sessions”. In 
Jatkasaari, another of the smart districts, Forum Virium said they don’t want to 
45
 The Guardian (2019), ‘Pissoirs and public votes: how Paris embraced the participatory budget’, 
https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2019/oct/03/pissoirs-and-public-votes-how-paris-embraced-the-participatory-budget 
46
 Public Policy Institute for Wales (2017), ‘Participatory Budgeting: An Evidence Review’, 
http://ppiw.org.uk/files/2017/08/PPIW-report_participatory-budgeting-evidence-review_-July-2017-FINAL.pdf  
47
 Medium (2017), ‘Civic Panel. Residents decide’, ​https://medium.com/@gdansk/civic-panel-residents-decide-e844590e88ec 
48
 A2P2 (2016), ‘Civic Panel on climate change adaptation in Gdańsk’, 
http://a2p2.pl/en/projects/civic-panel-on-climate-change-adaptation-in-Gdańsk/ 
49
 Resilience (2017), ‘Solutions: How the Poles Are Making Democracy Work Again in Gdansk’, 
https://www.resilience.org/stories/2017-11-22/solutions-how-the-poles-are-making-democracy-work-again-in-gdansk/  
50
 Github, ‘Amsterdam Projects’, ​https://amsterdam.github.io/projects/ 
51
 OpenStad: online participant tools, ​https://www.amsterdam.nl/bestuur-organisatie/meedenken-meepraten/openstad-online/ 
52
 De Stem van Centrum, ​https://stemvancentrum.amsterdam.nl/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   15 

 
“engage people on a project-by-project [basis]” and instead are “going to be running 
a club of people, we want to have a continuous dialogue with people living there”. 
Equipping citizens with basic digital skills can also make engagement more 
meaningful. In Amsterdam, there is a “whole digital skills education programme, 
which is free and accessible for everybody”. The city council also funds “a few local 
initiatives that help people in digital literacy [such as] for refugees”. The schemes are 
small – “only €20,000 per initiative” – but they are using them to “try to reach out to 
people who are not in the library, who don’t look at our website, are not in the same 
target group that we always find”. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   16 

 
How cities use open 
data and support a data 
infrastructure  
Cities collect a wide range of data about people, businesses and services. The data is 
collected primarily by city governments, but also by academic institutions, community 
groups and private sector organisations. Data is collected through: 
 
●delivery of services  
●embedded sensors in infrastructure  
●research from statistics authorities. 
 
As cities seek to embed more data capture technologies into public spaces, the data 
collected is likely to increase. This data will be from across the data spectrum – from 
closed, to shared, to open. It will have the power to help inform and make better 
53
decisions, but it must be done ethically and fairly, and with privacy, data protection 
and security firmly in place. This means considering any negative impacts and 
minimising them; being transparent with what data is being collected, for what 
purpose and by whom; and determining how and when it will be accessed, shared, 
stored and deleted. 
 
Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts described Forum Virium’s IoT programme as “trying to ensure 
that the city is creating or collecting the data that our future city services need”. This 
data will be about everything from transport to movement of people, energy usage, 
crime, infrastructure, weather and so on. The collection, storage, analysis and use of 
this type of data is not new, but smart technologies (such as IoT sensors, apps or 
tech-enabled services) enable it to happen at a far greater speed and scale than ever 
before. The most important thing cities can do in this area is to understand what data 
is needed for what a city is trying to achieve. The focus should be on finding good 
quality data that is useful, rather than focusing on accumulation and big data.  
Open data 
Open data is data that anyone can access, use and share. It can bring significant 
54
value to cities, by helping to improve the efficiency of services, increase access to 
services and lead to more evidence-based policymaking. It can also lead to 
55
innovation by bringing new and more diverse apps and services to citizens, 
businesses and authorities alike.  
 
53
 Open Data Institute, ‘The Data Spectrum’, ​https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/the-data-spectrum/ 
54
 Open Data Institute (2017), ‘What is open data and why should we care?’, 
https://theodi.org/article/what-is-open-data-and-why-should-we-care/ 
55
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Using open data for public services’, 
https://theodi.org/article/using-open-data-for-public-services-report-2/  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   17 

 
Open data portals act as platforms for anyone to access public data relating to the 
city, region or state. All four of the cities we focused on have an open data portal, 
these portals are: 
 
●Amsterdam: data.Amsterdam 
56
●Gdańsk: Otwarty Gdańsk 
57
●Hamburg: Transparenzportal Hamburg 
58
●Helsinki: Helsinki Region Infoshare  
59
 
Kris Garski in Gdańsk spoke of the difficulty in knowing what data to publish: “It is 
always a question of demand and supply. So should we wait for people to request 
the data and be open? Or should we make an effort on our own to open some data... 
because sometimes it takes a lot of money to open data and there is a risk that the 
demand for it will be relatively small.”  
 
For example, geospatial and map data, which can bring huge value if made openly 
available, enabling the calculation of efficient transport routes, support for planning of 
homes and businesses, or for identifying areas of flooding risk, for example, is not 
60
openly available everywhere. We learned that in Poland the law prohibits providing 
free access to “some geographical or map data, related to real estate... we have to 
take money from people, even if we believe such a resource could be freely 
available”. Kris Garski was well aware that this was a barrier to wider opportunity.  
 
This is why the principle of publishing with a purpose can bring such value. The Open 
Data Charter described this reasoning in its 2018 strategy: “Rather than advocating 
for governments to open up as much data as possible, as fast as possible, we 
develop practical guidance for government reformers to open up datasets in ways 
that are most likely to yield specific and tangible benefits to citizens.” This purpose 
61
can be for transparency, to allow people to solve specific problems, or to boost 
innovation. Part of being able to find this purpose is by ensuring that cities are in 
open and receptive dialogue with the public and engage in open innovation so that 
problems can be solved together – open data can support this.  
APIs 
One method of accessing data is via the use of Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs). An API is code which enables digital services to interact with each other and 
exchange data. APIs allow real-time access to data and therefore form the foundation 
of many services used frequently: weather apps, paying for products in online stores, 
integrating maps into websites, and more.  
 
APIs “provide the foundations for digital services of the future”. They help to link 
62
data across different systems and improve interoperability. The success of journey 
planning apps such as Citymapper would not be possible without APIs.  
56
 data.Amsterdam, ​https://data.amsterdam.nl/  
57
 Otwarty Gdańsk, ​https://www.gdansk.pl/otwarte-dane  
58
 Transparenzportal Hamburg, ​http://transparenz.hamburg.de/open-data/  
59
 Helsinki Region Infoshare, ​http://www.hri.fi/en/  
60
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Using geospatial data: what you need to know about licences’, 
https://theodi.org/article/using-geospatial-data-what-you-need-to-know-about-licences/ 
61
 Open Data Charter  (2018), ‘Publishing with Purpose’, 
https://medium.com/@opendatacharter/publishing-with-purpose-introducing-our-2018-strategy-ddbf7ab46098 
62
 European Data Portal (2017), ‘Open Smart City APIs’, 
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/en/news/open-smart-city-apis  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   18 

 
 
Helsinki is a leader in developing what Hanna referred to as an “API first approach 
with a lot of service design for new services”. Forum Virium chair the CitySDK project,
 which aims to develop an open source API toolkit for cities around the world to 
63
use. 
64
Open source 
Rather than being tied to lengthy and expensive contracts for proprietary software, 
cities are increasingly turning to software which is open source.  
 
Open source is code that is published under an open licence, allowing anyone to use, 
share and improve the software. Using open source can help a city government save 
money, while building software from scratch or adapting code that has already been 
published – such as from the open source code repository GitHub – can lead to 
better and more bespoke solutions.  
 
Because the open source code is published online, anyone with the right skills can 
view, test and audit it, enabling issues to be spotted, or suggestions for 
improvements to be more collaborative. Fostering a community around open source 
develops the skills of the city and keeps the economic activity within it.  
 
In Helsinki, Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts told us that: “There’s a lot of open source 
development work going on... data platforms, data management, data content 
management, and so forth.” 
 
Kris Garski detailed how his team sees potential in an open source tool developed in 
Madrid for engaging with citizens. At Gdańsk City Hall, Kris said they are “researching 
things like Consul, which was software developed by the City Hall of Madrid”.  
65
 
The City Council in Amsterdam has gone one step further. In summer 2019, it 
officially announced that for software “everything will be open... we’re going to build 
[it] ourselves”. While this will benefit Amsterdam first and foremost, in the long term it 
has the potential to benefit other cities who will be able to adapt the software for their 
own use and particular needs and circumstances.  
Putting data infrastructure into practice: mobility 
The European Commission outlined mobility as one of the key requirements for the 
smart city. The movement of people around a city is obviously a critical element of 
any city’s infrastructure. It is hugely complex; involving a range of different actors and 
challenges, as different public and private companies are responsible for different 
modes of transport. Open data has been shown to help. The oft-cited example of this 
is in London, where the provision of free, accurate, real-time open data by Transport 
for London was found to help the city’s economy by up to £130m a year.  
66
 
Open data can also help join up data from different sources so that cities can deliver 
better services to citizens. Cities recognise this potential. Vision Hamburg 2030 
63
 CitySDK, ​https://www.citysdk.eu/ 
64
 CitySDK (2017), ‘Open API recommendations’, 
https://www.citysdk.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/20171116_APIrecommendations_WEB.pdf 
65
 Consul, ​http://consulproject.org/ 
66
 Transport for London (2017), ‘TfL’s free open data boosts London's economy’, 
https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2017/october/tfl-s-free-open-data-boosts-london-s-economy  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   19 

 
describes the desire for “intelligent mobility for a livable city” achieved through a 
67
combination of sharing initiatives, on-demand services and local public transport.  
 
Journey planning apps – such as Whim in Helsinki, Citymapper and Google Maps –  
68
allow users to plan, from one app, their transport routes across the city using live 
transport open data published by the city. Users see the length of journeys, what 
transport to use (including suggestions on walking, buses, trains, taxis and dockless 
bikes) and prices.  
 
In all the cities we focused on, open data has been used to address mobility 
challenges. Amsterdam has “all mobility data accessible as well via APIs, including 
parking, traffic etc”. Hamburg uses “live data for traffic and car parks”, which is also 
used by logistics organisations and some large navigation companies such as 
TomTom and Here.  
 
Kris Garski outlined further data linking opportunities for Gdansk: “If we just connect 
all of these data... from different sources, like from public administration and private 
sectors and data from transportation companies, data from telecommunication 
companies, we may get a lot of new insights on how residents of Gdańsk commute.” 
In order to do this, it would be beneficial if non-personal data held by private sector 
organisations was published openly. 
 
If cities know better how its citizens move around the city, they can make better 
decisions; they can design roads and public transport better. They can also more 
easily understand the effects of changes to the transport system, such as roadworks 
or subway re-developments.  
 
The opportunity for the joining up of data from different mobility sources is perhaps 
best exemplified by developments in Mobility as a Service (‘MaaS’). Seen as the 
‘Netflix of mobility’, MaaS platforms operate using a monthly subscription model 
69
whereby users pay a set fee for unlimited travel and booking for multiple forms of 
transport, all from one app. This means that users pay for access to buses, trams, 
tubes, and sometimes bikes and taxis, using one account and one fee.  
 
Helsinki has embraced this potential, mandating through law “that everybody who is 
selling tickets has to sell them through an API”. The use of the API allows the data to 
be exchanged more easily between the various platforms and be consolidated into 
one service. The benefits for users are clear: they get easier, quicker and often 
cheaper access to transport within their city. For cities, there is a potential for access 
to more complete data about door-to-door travel, which is very difficult with current 
transport systems when buses, trains and taxis are operated by different 
organisations and are not booked through a common platform. In Helsinki, it has had 
the effect of “kind of forcing them [transport providers] towards an open ecosystem”. 
MaaS is still in its infancy and has not been capable of demonstrating its economic 
sustainability as an idea as of yet.  
67
 E-zigurat (2019), ‘Smart City Series: Smart City Hamburg — A Look Inside The Visionary Bottom-up 
Initiative’, ​https://www.e-zigurat.com/blog/en/smart-city-series-hamburg/ 
68
 Whim, ​https://whimapp.com/ 
69
 Helsinki Smart, ‘Whim’, ​https://helsinkismart.fi/portfolio-items/whim/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   20 

 
Putting data infrastructure into practice: environment  
Sustainability and energy efficiency was another requirement outlined by the 
European Commission. According to UN Habitat, cities are a “cause of and solution 
to” climate change.  
70
 
Our interviewees all referenced being involved in energy-related EU-funded projects, 
such as mySMARTLife and RUGGEDISED. These projects include activities such 
7172
as smart home solutions, electric vehicle charging outputs and smart grids. They also 
involve ‘retrofitting’ certain areas, or zones within cities, with new forms of heating or 
energy production. 
 
Gdańsk participated as a follower city in the RUGGEDISED project. The goals of 
RUGGEDISED were to “demonstrate in total 32 innovative and integrated smart 
solutions in the cross-section of energy, transport and ICT”. Gdańsk focused on 
73
offering “activities complementary to building insulation, thermo-modernisation, and 
heat-network connections”.  
74
 
Helsinki and Hamburg participated in the mySMARTLife project, with the aim of 
making the cities “more environmentally friendly by reducing the CO2 emissions of 
cities and increasing the use of renewable energy sources”.  
75
 
According to Ger Baron, as part of the Energy Atlas project, data has begun to be 
76
shared in Amsterdam about “rooftops, that would potentially be interesting for solar 
panels”. There is now “quite a bit of data being used”, in particular by “quite a few 
smaller companies who actually sell solar panels to these houses, or companies”.  
 
The use of data in mobility may also encourage people to be more environmentally 
aware about the modes of transport they use. According to Pekka Koponen, if people 
use data enabled mobility services to move around, it could have “quite a large 
impact for the city, if people don't own a car and the cars are not parked on the 
streets”. Research suggests that moving away from a reliance on cars, when they are 
not vital to someone’s livelihood, can boost the health of city residents and reduce a 
city's emissions. 
77
 
Not all environmental projects involve large technological deployment. Hanna 
Niemi-Hugaerts described how Forum Virium is testing “ready-made... home mobile 
sensor kits” that citizens can use to monitor the environment themselves. Around 350 
people have signed up to the project, which revolves around “smart flower pots in 
community gardens”. Throughout the process, it has been “really hands on” and the 
city has “ideate[d] together” alongside the participants.  
 
70
 UN News (2019), ‘Cities: a “cause of and solution to” climate change’, ​https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/09/1046662 
71
 MySMARTLife, ​https://www.mysmartlife.eu/mysmartlife/  
72
 RUGGEDISED, ​https://ruggedised.eu/home/ 
73
 RUGGEDISED, ‘Smart Solutions Overview’, 
https://ruggedised.eu/smart-solutions/smart-solutions-overview/ 
74
 RUGGEDISED, ‘Gdańsk’, ​https://ruggedised.eu/cities/Gdańsk/ 
75
 MySMARTLife, ​https://www.mysmartlife.eu/mysmartlife/ 
76
 Opendatasoft (2017), ‘How Amsterdam Uses Urban Data to Build a More Sustainable City’, 
https://www.opendatasoft.com/blog/amsterdams-energy-atlas-using-urban-data-to-build-a-sustainable-city 
77
 BBC (2019), ‘What happens when a city bans cars from its streets?’, 
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20191011-what-happens-when-a-city-bans-car-from-its-streets 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   21 

 
These projects in the field of mobility and energy offer a glimpse into how technology 
and data may be used to improve the environment in cities. Going forward, these 
projects can help cities to adopt greener and more sustainable approaches to air 
quality and transportation. Furthermore, the opportunity for citizens to collaborate 
and collect data to aid these approaches is a positive and welcome approach to 
collaborative open data.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   22 

 
How cities foster open 
innovation  
Open innovation involves sharing data and ideas, and supporting innovative projects 
from citizens, civic tech organisations, startups, and business or academia. For this 
to work, city governments need to share details about what problems they are facing, 
and equip citizens and organisations with the skills and resources to be able to solve 
these problems. Activities which can aid and contribute to this include:  
 
●providing shared and open data  
●hosting events 
●running accelerators and challenges  
●establishing specialist organisations  
78
●creating new centres and buildings for GovTech and startups  
79
●establishing partnerships  
●running digital skills programmes.  
 
Hackathons are one example of open innovation and collaboration. They are short 
events where programmers, entrepreneurs and public sector authorities gather to 
collaborate on solving a problem. Often, the best proposals from these events are 
granted funding to pursue their ideas further. Other similar models include 
co-creation events, accelerator programmes and crowdsourcing. 
80
 
Kris Garski detailed how Gdańsk City Council is “considering cooperation with other 
public sector units and the private sector to take part in hackathons they are running 
to provide them with data and to promote our data”. He explained that they “would 
like to see more and bigger engagement from the developer community”. He wants 
people to: “come to us with ideas for new applications. And then if it is a sensible 
idea, we are ready to talk about opening new data in the city.” Sascha Tegtmeyer 
from Hamburg, where they use hackathons to help participants “realise their use 
cases with our data”, said that they use such events to “explain to people: here is our 
open data – this is the data that might be useful for your use case”.  
 
Yet, Ger Baron in Amsterdam expressed that the short timescale of these events is 
not always beneficial. He outlined that sustainability of the projects was key; 
something which wasn’t always appreciated: “Ideas are not the issue, but actually 
building something that can be used is a bit more complicated.” In Amsterdam, there 
is an opportunity for “companies to create partnerships with us, so they get our data 
but we also spend some time with them [doing] workshops on what they actually 
need”, and establish whether any adjustments need to be made in the data so that 
they can use it. There is also a startup residence programme which is run three or 
81
78
 For example, the London Office of Technology and Innovation, 
https://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/who-we-are/london-office-technology-and-innovation-loti 
79
 For example, the Tontine building in Glasgow (​https://www.tontineglasgow.co.uk/​) or the Urban 
Innovation Centre in London (​https://futurecities.catapult.org.uk/urban-innovation-centre/about/​) 
80
 Viima (2016), ‘16 Examples of Open Innovation – What Can We Learn From Them?’, 
https://www.viima.com/blog/16-examples-of-open-innovation-what-can-we-learn-from-them  
81
 Startup in Residence, ‘Amsterdam’, ​https://startupinresidence.com/amsterdam/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   23 

 
four times a year. Supporting new business in this way can help to overcome some of 
the barriers the ODI has identified that organisations could face when they attempt 
82
to scale beyond an interesting pilot; including sustainable funding, and access to 
advice and skills.  
 
Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts from Forum Virium said that there is the need to “have a line 
open towards the [technical] community”. She suggested that “it’s good to start this 
communication as soon as possible – start at the planning stage”. For example, if 
Forum Virium has an idea that is thought would be an effective service, they will ask 
relevant technical individuals or organisations: “Hey, we might create this API, and 
this is what we were planning. What would you need for it?” This engagement can 
help prevent time and money being wasted if Forum Virum has what they believe is a 
good idea, only for “the developers [to] have some other needs”.  
 
Continuous engagement with an enthusiastic ‘open’ community can result in a 
virtuous cycle. According to Hanna, in Helsinki, when people within government 
departments “hear all these creative ideas this community is having, they get a lot 
more motivation to work on getting the stuff open.” 
 
Multiple interviewees mentioned how important the Code for America movement – 
described on the website as “a national alliance of community organizers, 
developers, and designers that are putting technology to work in service of our local 
communities” – was for their city. Code for Poland and Code for Hamburg were 
838485
both set up following the success of Code for America. In Poland, Kris Garski told us 
that the main aim was to “[build] a community between administration and 
developers”. In Hamburg, they use the group “to explain our data [and] to hear what 
their needs are for our data platform”.  
 
Helsinki formed a similar group – Helsinki Loves Developers – to engage directly 
86
with the people who want to use city data. This engagement can be meaningful for all 
parties involved, as skills and insights are shared between participants.  
Schools, colleges and universities can also play a part in innovation in the city. Ger 
Baron spoke of the role of the Amsterdam Metropolitan Solutions Institute. Students 
87
there are given the opportunity to “use our data for a lot of their research.”  
 
In Gdańsk, Kris Garski told us about the encouragement of students to “play with the 
data to try to build a solution”. Although no sustainable, commercial projects have 
come out of this engagement with students, they saw it as “a very useful tool to 
sharpen [the students’] coding skills by coding with real data and build a better 
understanding of how the city works.”. 
  
82
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Scaling data-enabled projects: a checklist’, 
https://theodi.org/article/scaling-data-enabled-projects-a-checklist/ 
83
 Code for America, ‘The Brigade Network’, ​https://brigade.codeforamerica.org/  
84
 Code for Poland, ​https://codeforpoland.org/ 
85
 Code for Germany, ‘Hamburg’, ​https://codefor.de/hamburg/ 
86
 Helsinki Loves Developers, ​https://dev.hel.fi/ 
87
 Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Metropolitan Solutions, ​https://www.ams-institute.org/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   24 

 
How cities are encouraging 
the use of data within city 
departments  
For cities to take advantage of innovative approaches to services, it is important they 
overcome any internal issues.  
 
First, cities already have access to a wealth of data, from official statistics to data 
collected during the delivery of services. Ensuring it is used, shared and understood 
is critical.  
 
Unlocking valuable, untapped data is an important and ongoing focus in the cities we 
focused on. Our interviewees outlined the problem of data silos between city 
government departments. In Gdańsk, the city took steps to begin breaking these silos 
down. A “tour through the city hall departments” was conducted, which involved 
“talking with managers and talking with staff... [asking them] what data do you have? 
Who is responsible for it? Who is cooperating with the data you have? What could we 
open?”. This provides a solid foundation for which to evaluate the benefits that new 
technologies or projects could bring – for example if they provide a source of useful 
data that is not already collected.  
 
But, there is little point pursuing a revolutionary, tech-based agenda if the city staff 
don’t trust the data, don’t have the skills to understand it, or don’t see the value in 
data and technology. The ODI’s Data Skills Framework shows the range of skills 
88
required to maximise value of data across an organisation such as a city authority. 
Our interviewees spoke of how, in their organisations, they are recognising a deficit in 
data skills, and are trying to change it.  
In order to develop trust and belief in the use of data and technology, the Helsinki 
government is to “start acting and doing even small things... set up a pilot and try 
something and learn”. Hanna Niemi-Hugaerts spoke about the value of focusing first 
on “the internal benefits of getting data out there and open” so that you have “direct 
benefits... as an organisation”. This means that it “doesn’t then feel as though you 
have to add on so much, because you’ve already benefited yourself”. Starting small 
and demonstrating value can help get people on board with the change cities are 
trying to achieve.  
 
In both Amsterdam and Helsinki, there has been a concerted effort over the last few 
years to hire people with the right skills who can deliver on data-enabled change, 
such as coders, software developers and data analysts. In Amsterdam, the emphasis 
is now on hiring “people who understand software and coding”. This approach was 
taken early on by Helsinki city government; they hired scores of coders and 
developers at the beginning of their digitalisation journey, and have recently 
88
 The Open Data Institute (2019), ‘The 2019 Data Skills Framework’ 
https://theodi.org/article/open-data-skills-framework/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   25 

 
expanded their call to attract international tech talent to work in the city. Hiring staff 
89
with this expertise can help city governments to build things themselves, meaning 
that expensive proprietary software does not need to be procured. 
 
The balance then needs to be struck between hiring staff with the right technical skills 
to work alongside staff with more policy experience and understanding of how city 
governments operate. Cities should also be attempting to upskill those already 
working within the authority, encouraging everyone to speak the same language.  
In Amsterdam, directors were sent on a course “where they got educated on data: 
what does it mean, what are the ethics behind it, what is the legislation behind it, 
what does GDPR [General Data Protection Regulation] mean”. Part of this was 
changing the mindset so that they know that “this is not something you should switch 
to the data department, but is something that, as a director of a department, you are 
responsible for these things yourself”. They are treating this as an “ongoing exercise” 
and are also now training the layer of managers below them in a similar manner. 
 
Specialist positions such as Chief Digital Officers can also provide this leadership. 
Hamburg’s Chief Digital Officer has a “working group that is all of the leaders of the 
departments and different ministries” that are “working good together”. If senior 
figures recognise the value of data and advocate for the extensive use of technology 
and openness within their city, positive change will be easier to achieve.  
  
89
 Signals From Helsinki (2019), ‘Helsinki, World's First City as a Service Is Not Just a Joke – Attracts Over 
6,500 applications from +100 cities’, 
https://www.signalsfromhelsinki.fi/en/news/helsinki-worlds-first-city-service-not-just-joke-attracts-over-65
00-applications-100-cities 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   26 

 
How cities are accessing 
data held by private 
organisations  
A city’s data infrastructure consists of data that is managed by public institutions 
such as housing and transport authorities, as well as data collected and held by the 
private sector organisations that operate within them. This includes data generated 
by businesses that work with the cities to deliver public services, as well as those that 
provide services directly to their citizens, visitors and others. 
 
Data that is currently held by a variety of private sector organisations, for example 
Uber, Google, AirBnB, IoT sensor manufacturers, portal developers, dockless bike 
providers or app creators, is often out of reach to city governments. This data could 
be highly valuable in helping cities develop better services or make better decisions. 
As access to privately held data is complex, some researchers who are keen to try 
and develop similar data have attempted to deploy alternative workarounds, such as 
“sending students to catch rides en masse, or signing up to drive themselves”.  
90
 
A paper by the Open Source Lab suggested that: “Data sharing between the public 
and private sector will play a critical role in helping transit agencies leverage future 
disruptions in mobility induced by shared mobility services and be of even greater 
service to their community by adapting to user needs, for example.” 
91
 
In general, our interviewees spoke of their desire to get access to data from 
commercial and private sector organisations working within the city. We learned that 
there are a range of potential uses of this type of data. The data, from Uber, Waze 
and Lyft for example, could assist in making decisions that could inform traffic 
planning. Opening up or establishing shared access to this data could also help to 
stimulate innovation and promote competition – as the Helsinki mobility API has 
demonstrated with the development of Whim. There may also be regulatory or 
enforcement reasons whereby access can bring benefits, such as ensuring rental 
properties are not driving up property prices or circumventing rental laws in certain 
areas. 
92
 
In some cities, this data sharing is happening. Strava, the popular fitness activity 
tracking app, has developed Strava Metro in a bid to share more data with city 
93
governments to improve the quality and safety of urban bike lanes. Through Uber 
94
90
 WIRED (2018), ‘Dying to Know Uber's Secrets, Data-Hungry Cities Get Creative’, 
https://www.wired.com/story/uber-lyft-data-research-driver-pay/  
91
 Open Source Lab (2019), ‘The Open Source Paradigm in the Digital Transformation — Enabling a Sustainable Future in 
Mobility’,  
https://opensourcelab.dfki.de/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/OpenSourceMobility_WhitePaper_March2019.pdf  
92
 WIRED (2019), ‘Airbnb and New York City Reach a Truce on Home-Sharing Data’, 
https://www.wired.com/story/airbnb-new-york-city-reach-truce-on-home-sharing-data/  
93
 Strava Metro, ​https://metro.strava.com/ 
94
 Curbed (2016), ‘How a fitness app for cyclists is reshaping city planning’, 
https://www.curbed.com/2016/9/2/12749686/cycling-city-planning-app-strava  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   27 

 
Movement, Uber is sharing anonymised trip data with city authority planning teams 
95
to help them to understand the flow of traffic. These big companies can leverage data 
access on favourable terms, for example being able to operate in a city, or for a wider 
public benefit – as with Strava. In other cities, in the US in particular, regulatory power 
has been used to compel access to data from scooter and electric bike companies. 
96
But such initiatives are still not the norm, and may only occur in some cities and not 
others.  
 
In all four of the cities we focused on, there were discussions ongoing about ways 
and opportunities of gaining access to data private companies have acquired and are 
retaining.  
 
This is an area which the ODI is keen to see explored further. We want cities to be 
ensuring equity around who accesses, uses and benefits from data. We know this is 
an area that much work needs to be done in, particularly in relation to building trust 
and ensuring that cities approach companies to share with specific projects in mind – 
at least to start with.  
 
One of the key barriers the private sector claims it faces is ensuring the trust of their 
customers. Our interviewee in Helsinki told us that the telecoms companies are 
“afraid of privacy and security and losing the customer trust”. Privacy and security of 
personal data are of course critical, and data protection laws, including GDPR, are a 
fundamental part of that. But not all data relevant to city decision making needs to be 
personal data; lots of data is what we refer to as ‘societal data’. Societal data is data 
which has traditionally been collected to help society make decisions for everyone 
about everyone, as opposed to pinpointing individuals. It can include census data, 
demographics, travel patterns and crime statistics, for example.  
 
A recent project the ODI undertook with the RSA and Luminate revealed that if this 
data is not used to re-identify people, and its use is explained, then people in the 
main are happy for it to be collected, used and shared. Private sector organisations 
97
could therefore share non-personal data with cities going forward, in order to improve 
decision making. This is also an opportunity for better communication with the public 
about the types of data being collected and why.  
 
A 2019 Bloomberg article discussed the issue of access to data while respecting 
98
privacy: “Privacy concerns are real, but that doesn’t mean companies should be able 
to prevent responsible access to their data... Better cities need better data — to 
prevent crashes, minimize traffic congestion and get people where they need to go 
efficiently. So the way to protect mobility data is not to let private companies keep it 
to themselves; it’s for cities to raise the bar on digital privacy, championing practices 
that protect both citizens and the public interest.” 
 
Ger Baron in Amsterdam is trying to work more closely with the private sector. He 
told us of 28 partnerships with large insurance, car and tech companies – the data 
95
 Uber Movement, ​https://movement.uber.com/?lang=en-GB 
96
 Los Angeles Times (2020), ‘L.A. wins appeal in fight with Uber over scooter and bike data‘, 
https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-02-11/uber-jump-bikes-scooters-permit-ladot-data-fight-ruling  
97
 RSA, ODI, Luminate (2019), ‘About Data About Us’, 
https://www.thersa.org/globalassets/pdfs/reports/data-about-us-final-report.pdf 
98
 Bloomberg Opinion (2019), ‘Cities Need Scooter Data, and They Need to Keep It Safe’, 
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-06-17/uber-and-lyft-shouldn-t-hold-electric-scooter-data-hostage  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   28 

 
from which was used for mainly mobility, such as “crowd management, traffic 
management on a daily basis.”  
 
In Hamburg, Sascha Tegtmeyer discussed how access to private data represented a 
more fundamental issue: “We also have to manage our city, and it’s not an option for 
us that a company knows how many cars are paring in Hamburg, but we as a city 
don’t know this.” 
 
In Helsinki, Forum Virium told us how they purchased – using EU funding – data from 
telecoms companies. Now that they have “got some of the data, we are learning how 
we can use it together with the city, how we can use that in transport, or traffic 
planning and city planning”. This approach is one way of engaging with the private 
sector, but alternatives to using public money should be sought where possible. 
 
Ger Baron indicated a similar concern and offered a couple of ideas as to how 
companies could improve engagement with cities. He indicated that he felt 
companies “have an image problem” and that improved sharing of data would “help 
their image”. Furthermore, he speculated that regulation in this area would come 
“within five years”, enabling cities access to private sector data and improved 
collaboration.  
 
As with any use of data within cities, there is no singular approach that can act as a 
model for other cities to adopt. Instead, cities at the leading edge of developing 
modes of access should continue their dialogue with the private sector, experiment 
incrementally and publicly share the successes and challenges from their work.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   29 

 
How cities are acting 
ethically with the use of data  
Ethics play a crucial role in the use of data and technology within cities, just as they 
do within all facets of life. Citizens need to be able to trust that the government is 
going to use data securely, fairly and ethically. When misuse or exploitation of data is 
in the news, it is important that cities develop strong, transparent and ethical 
approaches to how citizens’ data is to be collected, used, shared and stored. As 
artificial intelligence (AI), algorithms and machine learning become the norm for 
decision making, cities will need to be clear how their use is delivering a positive 
impact and how negative impacts are minimised.  
 
Our interviewees discussed their progress in adopting these principles. As a baseline, 
Kris Garski asserted that in Gdańsk, “we protect the data of private citizens. It’s rule 
number one that we open only data which is not protected by law. So privacy is very 
protected here”.  
 
But the ethical use of data goes beyond following laws, such as the EU’s GDPR, to 
99
protect privacy. In Amsterdam, Ger Baron said that technology must be “responsible” 
and “work for us and not against us”. Ger defined responsible technology as “open, 
auditable, transparent and doing something that actually contributes to people... 
[and] society”. To make this more practical, the city government has developed a 
methodology, as part of the Tada project, “to discuss ethics and dilemmas” when 
100
using and combining data.  
 
Ensuring that technology is responsible has resulted in certain projects being halted. 
Ger Baron described how in Amsterdam they “developed some algorithms which the 
input was people with a certain profile who would get an invite for a job interview”. 
The intention was to get unemployed people into work for the same company for over 
12 months, but Ger outlined an issue with an algorithm, when it was revealed that it 
was only flagging “people with a certain profile”. Rather than trying to fix the 
algorithm or the datasets used, Ger described how they simply “decided that we're 
not going to do this. So we want just people to do the matchmaking basically, we can 
try to find ways to do this without discrimination”.  
 
Other cities around the world are protecting data ethics through new rules and 
regulations. In San Francisco, the strong step was taken to ban facial recognition use 
by the police and other city agencies, citing the need to protect citizens from 
potential abuse.  
101
 
The Chief Digital Officers from Helsinki and London signed a declaration which 
included exploration of ethical uses of data in smart cities. Upon signing the 
102
99
 General Data Protection Regulation (2016), ​https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj  
100
 Tada.city, ​https://tada.city/ 
101
 New York Times (2019), ‘San Francisco bans facial recognition technology’, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/14/us/facial-recognition-ban-san-francisco.html 
102
 New Statesman Tech (2019), ‘London and Helsinki CDOs sign digital declaration on smart cities and data ethics’, 
https://tech.newstatesman.com/it-leaders/london-and-helsinki-cdos-sign-digital-declaration-on-smart-cities-and-data-ethics  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   30 

 
declaration, Helsinki Chief Digital Officer Mikko Rusama said that they’re “planning to 
work on clarifying the ethical principles of utilising data and AI, which is crucial in 
order to gain trust from residents”. 
 
It is paramount that cities consider the ethical implications of their services. Tools 
such as the ODI’s Data Ethics Canvas can help start this conversation by posing 
103
questions to ensure that the positive and negative impacts of a newly designed 
service can be considered and discussed before they become a reality.  
  
 
103
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘The Data Ethics Canvas’, ​https://theodi.org/article/data-ethics-canvas/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   31 

 
Concluding thoughts: 
the future of open cities 
and beyond 
 
Speaking with representatives of these four cities gave us an opportunity to listen to, 
and learn from, their successes in moving towards a more open future. It also 
enabled us to better understand the challenges they faced. 
Refocus to addressing local challenges 
Data and technology have great potential to be used by cities to make better 
decisions and make the city work better for everyone. But this has to be a deliberate 
process – initiated through strategies and policy positions, with the focus on 
delivering positive value through services.  
 
Rather than focusing on technology, the people we spoke to are seeking a range of 
other approaches: digitalisation, better and wider citizen engagement, APIs, improved 
use of existing data and the publication of government data. These approaches are 
welcome and we encourage the priority of openness.  
 
Most important, however, is the need to focus on solving specific, local challenges 
using data, and using openness and building trust as a means of doing that. By doing 
this, cities can move away from the focus on technology and work towards making 
services work for citizens, businesses and all communities. These services may be 
improved by the use of technology, but the emphasis we feel should be on using data 
to increase engagement, improve decision making and deliver better services. A 
focus on addressing specific problems can similarly help this re-prioritisation and 
may get more meaningful results than being the most cutting edge or technically 
innovative.  
Increase access to useful data from across the public and private 
sector 
There are, however, a number of foundational issues that cities must get right. One of 
the reasons the smart city vision is failing on its promises is that it focuses too much 
on expensive high-tech ‘solutions’, without developing a strong underlying data 
infrastructure and without upskilling staff to capitalise on it. The focus in the future 
104
must be on laying this groundwork.  
 
First, cities already have access to a wealth of useful data that, if identified and 
understood, may help them achieve their goals. One problem we are aware of is that 
data may languish within departments or organisations that are unaware that it could 
benefit other departments or organisations more widely. Ecosystem mapping a city’s 
104
 New York Times (2019), ‘Opinion: I’m an Engineer, and I’m Not Buying Into “Smart” Cities’, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/16/opinion/smart-cities.html 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   32 

 
data to understand where data sits, where it can and does flow, and where blockages 
to data access or sharing may exist, is a critical process for any city to undertake. Not 
only does this help determine existing data infrastructure, but it can aid the process 
of breaking down departmental silos. This alone can enable more value to be derived 
from useful data.  
Develop internal skills and motivation 
Second, developing internal skills and capability is vital. Cities should look at how to 
improve the digital capability of their departmental teams. This should be done first 
and foremost through upskilling the staff that are already working there, who already 
have the knowledge of policy and services, but who could benefit from training in 
data, technology and digital skills. Large city governments would be wise to follow 
Helsinki’s lead with an injection of highly skilled developers and coders.  
 
The belief that data, digital and technology can improve services must be held 
throughout all levels of the cities’ organisation. Senior management needs to 
champion their department or organisation’s use of data and technology. This can be 
formalised through schemes such as Hamburg’s Chief Digital Officer Council and the 
appointment of dedicated staff.  
Develop relationships between the private and public sectors to 
enable access to data 
Third, while we have learned that many cities are actively publishing data, making it 
openly available and encouraging wider use, the same cannot be said of the private 
sector. When it comes to decision making within a city environment, data held by the 
private sector has the potential to help answer a wide range of valuable questions, 
improve citizens’ lives and deliver better services. Without access to that data, many 
important and potentially urgent opportunities are being missed.  
 
We have learned that Forum Virium in Helsinki is buying data from the private sector, 
and this is also the case in local government in the United Kingdom. Rather than 
being required to use public money for this data, we would prefer to see better 
relationships built between cities and the private sector, where specific questions to 
help address specific problems can be discussed and worked on collaboratively. 
These partnerships should be strengthened by a belief in the equitable and 
sustainable access to data. City governments need to be able to access useful data 
sustainably, and relying on purchasing private sector data can push this access 
towards long-term uncertainty.  
 
For cities to solve complex problems for the benefit of citizens, engagement with the 
private sector needs to be developed.  
Engage with citizens and technical communities 
Tapping into the collective knowledge of citizens and citizen groups can lead to 
better engagement, better decision making and better services that people want to 
use.  
Engagement can be done in various ways, such as through focus groups like in 
Hamburg, using online platforms such as Decidim or Consul, or through citizen 
panels like in Gdańsk. To maximise the value of this engagement, citizens need to 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   33 

 
firstly understand the major issues around the use of data and technology – and cities 
can support this through education and digital skills.  
 
Engaging with skilled people and startups can help generate ideas for how a city can 
work better. Running innovation events, supporting and incubating startups, and 
publishing data are just some of the ways cities have been encouraging this 
innovation. When ideas are found to benefit the city, the government or other actors 
must ensure that the projects can scale to benefit wider groups and become 
sustainable. 
105
Learn from others 
Although cities are different in regards to their history, and their cultural, societal and 
geographical make-up, this does not mean that cities cannot work together and learn 
from the challenges and successes each has. Our research has shown that they have 
a lot in common, for example many are trying to tackle big issues such as the climate 
emergency and increasing citizens’ involvement in political decision making.  
 
In this politically challenging climate, cities can start by forming partnerships and 
expanding relationships with one another. The London–Helsinki Chief Digital Officer 
partnership launched in 2019, the data twinning of cities such as the Data City 
106
project in Leeds and Lille, and large-scale participation in the Open and Agile 
107
Smart Cities (OASC) network, offer glimpses into what these relationships can 
108
entail.  
 
But these relationships should go further, cities should adhere to Forum Virium’s 
Hanna Niemi-Huagerts’ rallying call: “don’t be afraid of copying things that work!”. 
With open data and open source software, this is a lot easier. Cities can benefit from 
a more open ecosystem by sharing data, source code, ideas, tips and guidance. 
Cities can build on past work and support other cities to do the same. Being open 
can bring cities closer to their citizens and businesses, and closer to other cities.  
And finally... 
 
We want to see the movement towards openness continue and for this report to 
generate some momentum for cities around the world to follow. We want to see cities 
try and build a more open and trustworthy ecosystem. The use of data and 
technology within cities can have a positive impact for everyone, if it is done so in an 
equitable and ethical manner. We want this open and trustworthy future to be 
delivered by cities through greater collaboration between cities and within city 
departments, less data hoarding from the public and private sector, and greater 
engagement with people, businesses and communities. And this positive should not 
remain in urban areas, but be replicated and adjusted to more rural areas too.  
 
105
 Open Data Institute, ‘R&D: Scaling data innovation’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-scaling-data-innovation/ 
106
 New Statesman Tech (2019), ‘London and Helsinki CDOs sign digital declaration on smart cities and 
data ethics’, 
https://tech.newstatesman.com/it-leaders/london-and-helsinki-cdos-sign-digital-declaration-on-smart-citie
s-and-data-ethics  
107
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘The Data City in Leeds and Lille: measuring data 
innovation’,​https://theodi.org/article/the-data-city-in-leeds-and-lille-measuring-data-innovation/ 
108
 Open and Agile Smart Cities, ​https://oascities.org/ 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportBecoming more open: the view from four European cities   34 