

1 

 
Introduction  
December 2020 marked the fifth anniversary of the Paris Agreement. The agreement 
reached in 2015 saw countries committing to substantially reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions in an effort to keep the increase in global average temperature to well 
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels while pursuing means to limit the increase to 
1.5 °C. Five years later, the UN Secretary-General, António Guterres, described the 
fight against the climate crisis as the ‘defining task of the 21st century’. 
1
 
As with other significant challenges we face, effective action in response to climate 
change can be supported by access to high-quality, relevant data, presented in ways 
that are both easy to understand and useful for decision making. Various types of 
2
environmental data, for instance, are used by cities across the world to reduce 
3
emissions and manage risk across a range of sectors such as energy, agriculture, 
industrial processes and product use, forestry and other land use, and waste. Climate 
data can also contribute to ‘granting voice and agency to people at risk, as long as it 
is accessible, understandable, and connected to local problems that affect 
communities’. 
4
 
No single organisation holds or controls all the relevant data, or alone has the 
resources and skills needed to use data in tackling the significant climate issues of 
our time. People, organisations and communities therefore need to coordinate and 
collaborate around the collection, use and sharing of data. 
 
The Open Data Institute (ODI) and Microsoft’s ​ongoing partnership​ seeks to advance 
the cause of open, trustworthy data sharing and collaboration, such that any 
organisation of any size can more easily collaborate around data and realise its 
benefits. The partnership is designed to support Microsoft’s wider ​Open Data 
Campaign​, launched in April 2020. 
 
As part of this work, the ODI conducted research between July and December 2020 
to identify priority areas within climate change where there is an opportunity to 
accelerate progress by increasing collaboration around data. From an initial long list 
of topics, together with Microsoft we prioritised ​six areas​ to focus on, using criteria 
such as the potential impact that data collaboration could have to address them. We 
then carried out more in-depth research, working with experts in these areas to 
understand the ​data ecosystem​ for each, and begin to assess the types of data 
collaboration that might be required. 
 
This paper presents the highlights of our research, summarising key findings on the 
gaps we have found in how data is currently shared and used for decision-making, 
1
 United Nations Secretary-General (2020), ‘​Secretary-General's address at Columbia University: "The 
State of the Planet"​’, 
https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2020-12-02/secretary-generals-address-columbia-univers
ity-the-state-of-the-planet-scroll-down-for-language-versions 
2
 Open Data Institute (ODI) (2020)‘​Data infrastructure for common challenges: why is it important?​’, 
https://theodi.org/project/data-infrastructure-for-common-challenges/ 
3
CDP Open Data Portal (2021), ‘​Cities​’,  ​https://www.cdp.net/en/cities  
4
 Open Data Charter (2019), ‘​Open data is needed for collaborative climate action​’, 
https://opendatacharter.medium.com/open-data-is-needed-for-collaborative-climate-action-f2423c9ac96c  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     2 

 
ongoing efforts to address these gaps, and subsequent opportunities for further data 
collaboration to tackle these pressing climate issues. 
 
We intend for this overview to be used by governments, corporations, civil society 
organisations, scientists and citizens to inform their decisions affecting the climate. 
The ODI and Microsoft are also looking for partners across the public, private and 
third sectors, globally, who are interested in supporting data collaboration in these 
areas. 
 
If you work on any of the six issues, hold or use relevant data, or have feedback or 
questions on this paper or the research behind it, please get in touch at 
diana.szasz@theodi.org​. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     3 

 
Achieving net-zero value 
chains through better 
tracking of scope 3 
emissions 
The data ecosystem 
Human emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are a primary driver 
of climate change. Countries, cities and companies across the world are setting 
net-zero targets to demonstrate their commitment to climate action. 
 
For countries, a net-zero commitment implies ‘deep reductions in emissions, with any 
remaining sources being removed from the atmosphere with greenhouse gas 
removals’. For businesses, the ​Science Based Targets initiative​ (SBTi) has proposed 
5
a working definition of net zero as: ‘achieving a state in which the activities within the 
value-chain of a company result in no net impact on the climate from greenhouse gas 
emissions’. To achieve net-zero targets, companies, therefore, have to look beyond 
6
their direct emissions of greenhouse gases (‘scope 1’) and their indirect emissions 
from the generation of purchased energy (‘scope 2’), and develop strategies to 
reduce the emissions generated within their value chain, both upstream and 
downstream (‘scope 3’). The upstream part of a company’s value chain includes all of 
the materials, people and environmental factors that contribute to its product and 
services. The downstream part of the value chain looks more closely at the 
7
customers, consumers, re-users and recyclers.  
8
 
Scope 3 emissions can account for ‘the largest source of emissions for companies 
and present the most significant opportunities to influence greenhouse gas 
reductions’. Reducing these emissions requires, first of all, an accurate assessment 
9
of these emissions. This relies on, among other things, effective data sharing 
between suppliers and the companies purchasing products from them globally.  
 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol, managed by the World Resources Institute, provides 
guidance in its ‘Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting 
Standard’ for calculating scope 3 emissions. However, according to the Carbon 
10
5
 The Carbon Trust, ‘​What we do​ ​–​ Net Zero’, ​https://www.carbontrust.com/what-we-do/net-zero  
6
 ibid 
7
Sustainable Business Council, ‘​The SBC Value Chain Guide ​–​ Upstream Value Chain​’, 
http://www.sbcvaluechain.org.nz/upstream-value-chain  
8
 Sustainable Business Council, ‘​The SBC Value Chain Guide – Downstream Value Chain​’ 
,​http://www.sbcvaluechain.org.nz/downstream-value-chain  
9
 World Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2011), ‘​Corporate 
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard Supplement to the GHG Protocol Corporate 
Accounting and Reporting Standard​’, 
https://files.wri.org/s3fs-public/pdf/ghgp_corporate_value_chain_scope_3_standard.pdf  
10
 Ibid 
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/Corporate-Value-Chain-Accounting-Reporing-Standar
d_041613_2.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     4 

 
Disclosure Project (CDP)’s ‘Global 500 Climate Change Report 2013’, ‘Current 
reporting of indirect scope 3 emissions does not reveal the full impact of companies’ 
value chains.’ Also, according to CDP’s 2016 Climate Change Report, ‘​Tracking 
11
Progress on Corporate Climate Action​’, nearly all emissions are in 2 of the 15 
12
categories scope 3 emissions are broken down into: category 1 (purchased goods 
and services) or category 11 (use of sold products).  
13
 
Currently, most companies find it difficult to calculate scope 3 emissions. Collecting 
data on these emissions that are not ‘owned’ by companies involves multiple 
stakeholders and data sources, and the accuracy depends on whether those 
stakeholders calculate their emissions in a consistent way. When calculated, 
14
companies often use secondary data to estimate the emissions that go into products 
and services, such as weighted averages across the industry, rather than primary 
supplier emission data. This results in rough approximations rather than a real picture 
of emissions in the supply chain, lacking the granularity that would allow companies 
to effectively identify and measure the impact of supply chain actions that can help 
reduce emissions. 
Increasing collaboration around data 
There is an opportunity to build on the interest from companies in making these 
calculations more efficient as well as the growing attention from governments and 
investors on company disclosures of environmental impact. Standard setting bodies 
are also taking steps towards the harmonisation of existing metrics such as the 
recent release of the ​ESG reporting metrics​ by the five environmental, social and 
corporate governance (ESG) standard setting organisations (the Carbon Disclosure 
Project, the Climate Disclosure Standards Board, the Global Reporting Initiative, the 
International Integrated Reporting Council and the Sustainability Accounting 
Standards Board) along with the World Economic Forum.  
 
A​ ​global data collaboration for better tracking scope 3 emissions produced in 
the supply chains of technology products ​could serve as a pilot to inform data 
collaboration practices among companies and their suppliers in other sectors of the 
economy. A data collaboration could focus on developing appropriate governance 
mechanisms, ie how decisions would be taken around what data is shared, how and 
with whom; and open data standards to support the process of combining data from 
different suppliers of technology companies – for example those that mine minerals 
for products, or transport companies that ship products/materials around the world. 
 
Working towards calculating scope 3 emissions more efficiently will not only help 
companies to understand where the majority of their emissions are coming from 
throughout their supply chain, but also allow them to identify where there are 
opportunities within their supply chains to reduce emissions. 
11
 PWC (2021), ‘​Sustainability and climate change​’, 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/services/sustainability/publications/carbon-disclosure-project.html 
12
 Science Based Targets, ‘Guidance For ICT Companies Setting Science Based Targets Mobile Networks 
Operators, Fixed Networks Operators And Data Centres Operators’, 
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/legacy/2020/04/GSMA_IP_SBT-report_WEB-SINGLE.pdf  
13
 CDP (2018), ‘​How can companies address their scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions?​’, 
https://www.cdp.net/en/articles/companies/how-can-companies-address-their-scope-3-greenhouse-gas-
emissions 
14
 Ecoact (2016), ‘​Good value chain: overcoming the challenge of collecting Scope 3 emissions​’, 
https://eco-act.com/scope-3/good-value-chain-overcoming-the-challenge-of-collecting-scope-3-emission
s/  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     5 

 
 
There are opportunities to complement or inform existing work in this area, such as 
the work done by the ​World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) 
on providing guidance on reducing value chain emissions, as well as other initiatives 
15
we learned about through our research such as the ​Transform to Net Zero Initiative 
and the ​Open Footprint Forum​. 
 
  
15
 WBCSD (2020), ‘​EcoVadis and WBCSD join forces to reduce scope 3 emissions​’, 
https://www.wbcsd.org/Overview/News-Insights/General/News/EcoVadis-and-WBCSD-join-forces-to-redu
ce-scope-3-emissions  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     6 

 
Supporting a ‘green’ 
recovery from Covid-19 
 
The data ecosystem 
A sustainable recovery from the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic is vital to 
addressing climate change. To shape both a short- and long-term economic recovery 
from the Covid-19 pandemic that also supports efforts to drive transformation to a 
net-zero emissions economy, decision makers require more frequent and more 
accurate data about local, national, and global scales of economic activity and their 
impacts on the environment. 
 
Policies that support ‘green’ or environmentally sustainable sectors at a country level, 
eg renewable energy and electric vehicles, have been outlined by governments in 
policy documents such as the Green New Deal in the United States (supporting 
16
infrastructure investment, job growth, and low to no impact on the environment) or 
the ​European Green Deal. Other policies might be specific to a region or city, such 
17
as installing pedestrian walkways or cycling pathways in place of roadways, or 
transitioning energy consumed by a local government more towards renewable 
energy. 
 
In many cases there ​can be huge gaps​ between a policy commitment, its 
implementation, and its impact – whether due to interceding issues over the long 
timespan of policy implementation, due to policies not being binding (thus without 
penalty if commitments are not met), or other factors. Data about plans and 
implementation is often not gathered in consolidated ways, making measurement or 
benchmarking of sustainable economic recovery difficult. The data needed to 
measure these impacts has a lot of overlap with the data used to inform the policies 
in the first place, but also may only extend to data on promised vs. realised 
commitments, lacking more detailed data on impact. Gathering the right data on 
economic performance – current and future – and environmental impact is therefore 
incredibly challenging. 
 
One hurdle specific to economic data is that the quality and timeliness of this type of 
data are somewhat contested. Quality comes down to both accuracy of a specific 
datapoint to measure a particular type of impact, and alignment of data as produced 
from various sources (particularly as methodologies often differ). For example, while 
Global Domestic Product (GDP) is a commonly shared metric, some experts state 
that it does not properly account for modern economic norms in a globalised world 
– for example, companies headquartered in one country with high activity in another 
country. It is particularly contested as a means of measuring sustainable economic 
growth, both financially and in the context of the environment. 
18
16
The New York Times (2019), ‘​What Is the Green New Deal? A Climate Proposal, Explained​’,, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/21/climate/green-new-deal-questions-answers.html  
17
 European Commission (2019), ‘​A European Green Deal Striving to be the first climate-neutral continent’​, 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en   
18
Journal of Cleaner Production (2020), ‘​Going beyond Gross Domestic Product as an indicator to bring 
coherence to the Sustainable Development 
Goals​’,​https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652619341022  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     7 

 
 
Timeliness is a factor because of the lack of automated processes for gathering data 
covering the full spectrum of the economy. Real-time data showing job losses, 
revenue from sales, and many other factors shaping the global economy are few and 
far between. Economic data is often backward-looking and focused on longer time 
spans, notably financial quarters. 
 
The challenges of measuring environmental impact as tied to economic activity are 
similar. Real-time data on the environment is also limited and not common; data is 
often only available as modeled impact, due to a lack of access to proprietary 
systems, or because related stakeholders (such as governments) are unwilling to 
share data because of potential reputational impacts. 
19
 
Together, these hurdles of identifying, finding, and accessing data that is accurate, 
reliable, and timely, make assessing the impacts of economic recovery incredibly 
challenging. 
Increasing collaboration around data 
Given the scale of the gaps that exist in relevant data on both economic activity and 
environmental activity, hyperlocal collaborations focused on particular sustainable 
economic policies, their resultant economic activity, and intended vs. actual 
environmental impact could have the best chance of delivering a better 
understanding of what sustainable economic recovery may look like and how it can 
be brought about. 
 
Pilot data collaborations bringing together relevant stakeholders in a US city or one of 
the other G20 countries may benefit from data that already exists through the ​Energy 
Policy Tracker of the International Institute for Sustainable Development​, which tracks 
real-time data on approved public finance and policy measures targeting energy 
generation and consumption to stimulate economies in response to the Covid-19 
pandemic. These country-level datasets are gathered and hosted by a number of 
organisations, including the International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), 
Overseas Development Institute, Columbia University in NYC, Instituto Tecnológico 
Autónomo de México (ITAM), and many more.  
 
There also appear to be opportunities to amplify the work of ​C40​ – a network which 
brings together data sources from various entities to inform economic and 
environmental efforts in cities – on a green and ‘just’ recovery; or other initiatives 
20
such as ​Icebreaker One​ in the UK, which is bringing together data to inform 
sustainable economic policies and investment through its ​Project Cygnus​ initiative.  
 
19
 The Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, United Nations Statistics Division,  World 
Bank, Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2019), ‘​Real-Time Data For The SDGS: Accelerating 
progress through timely information​’, 
https://www.data4sdgs.org/sites/default/files/2019-05/Real-time%20Data%20for%20the%20SDGs_Conc
ept%20Note.pdf  
20
C40 Knowledge (2020), ‘The Case for a Green and Just Recovery’, 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/The-Case-for-a-Green-and-Just-Recovery?language=en_US  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     8 

 
Reducing energy 
consumption in 
commercial buildings 
 
The data ecosystem 
Buildings account for around a third of global energy related to carbon emissions, 
due to the use of energy needed to heat, cool and power them. Global estimates of 
21
energy consumption and use by real estate or buildings range significantly, 
complicated by a lack of disaggregation among stated estimates (eg separating out 
construction from building, or distinguishing residential from commercial). For 
example, in 2018 the UN Environment Programme claimed building energy usage 
came in at about 36% of the final energy use globally, in contrast to the US Energy 
22
Information Agency’s estimate of real estate representing 20% of global delivered 
energy consumption. Estimates of emissions connected to commercial real estate 
23
hover around 40%.  
 
Many individual building operators, owners, investors, and other stakeholders have 
acknowledged these impacts and have committed to, or expressed interest in, 
reducing energy consumption and related emissions. However, understanding and 
24
improving operational energy efficiency in commercial real estate portfolios is 
currently prevented by fractured operations management setups. Common models of 
managing the physical footprints of commercial real estate are often decentralised. 
This means that lessees of a specific square footage within a broader footprint often 
have limited to no requirement or mechanism to gather or share data on their energy 
consumption practices with broader building management or ownership operations. 
Energy consumption and efficiency data is also often not digitised, low-tech or 
non​-automated. The data from utilities often comes on an infrequent basis, eg 
monthly billing, which is often not enough to inform better practices. All of this results 
in a lack of good-quality, high-frequency data on building operations management.  
 
The data available varies based on factors such as regional legislation or reporting 
mandates, incentives for data sharing, available certifications, and related contexts. 
25
For example, some national and regional governments have begun to roll out 
incentives, certifications, and/or partial mandates requiring energy efficiency ratings – 
21
UNEP Finance Initiative (2016), ‘​Sustainable Real Estate Investment​’, 
https://www.unepfi.org/publications/investment-publications/property-publications/sustainable-real-estate
-investment-2  
22
 UN Environment Programme (2019), ‘​2019 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction Sector​’, 
https://www.unenvironment.org/resources/publication/2019-global-status-report-buildings-and-constructi
on-sector  
23
EIA (2019), ‘​Global energy consumption driven by more electricity in residential, commercial buildings​’, 
https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=41753  
24
World Green Building Council, ‘​The Net Zero Carbon Buildings Commitment​’, 
https://www.worldgbc.org/thecommitment  
25
 Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (2014), ‘​Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings Energy 
Efficient Cities​’, 
https://www.esmap.org/sites/esmap.org/files/DocumentLibrary/ESMAP_Energy_Efficient_MayoralNote_20
14.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     9 

 
notably in the US with ​EnergySaver’s Portfolio Manager​ (for voluntary reporting of 
building energy efficiency) and Australia’s ​NABERS​ (an initiative supporting mandated 
reporting of building energy consumption). Some regionally-focused firms that 
manage large commercial real estate portfolios are rolling out their own targets and 
encouraging or supporting customers in adhering to them.  
 
The data gaps that remain prevent key decision makers from implementing necessary 
changes, such as: 
 
●Owners and operators changing operational practice in order to consume 
less energy; 
●Policymakers developing effective reporting mandates or transparency 
mechanisms, such as Display Energy Certificates (DECs) or frameworks 
26
such as the ​Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark​ (GRESB); and 
●Investors, policymakers, and other stakeholders with access to funding 
committing financing or providing related incentives. 
 
Collating data on building characteristics and energy use more efficiently and to a 
higher standard, coupled with new technologies for energy control and management, 
could drive significant reductions in their energy consumption. For any such effort, 
the risks associated with the collection of more granular, real-time data from 
buildings that can potentially be used to identify people need to be considered and 
mitigated accordingly. 
Increasing collaboration around data 
Local data collaborations between utility companies, energy services 
companies and companies owning or leasing commercial real estate to 
incentivise data sharing and increase data interoperability and digitisation of 
data streams​ could help move the industry towards a future where data that is 
currently siloed across real estate footprints is used more efficiently. More frequent, 
comparable and better quality data can support better target-setting, benchmarking 
and measurement of progress in energy efficiency by different constituents.  
 
Given the often regional scope of commercial real estate portfolios and the niche 
legislative contexts of different regions, pilot data collaborations on this issue would 
likely be most successful on a​ local or national level​. The best place to start would 
be to test out some models in​ regions where local governments are already 
mandating and enabling data sharing​ in this realm, such as in Australia (with its 
NABERS initiative and related policies that spawned it) and the US (such as ​in New 
York City​). The launch of the new Renovation Wave Strategy by the European 
Commission to improve the energy performance of buildings also creates a 
27
conducive environment for such collaborations in European cities.  
 
Data collaborations focused on informing reductions in building energy consumption 
could also build on the efforts of organisations such as the ​Berkeley Lawrence 
National Laboratory​ in the US that produced a modeling tool for operational energy 
26
Aldersgate Group, The UK Green Building Council (2017), ‘​Energy efficiency in the UK’s buildings: key 
priorities for the new government​’, 
https://www.ukgbc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/UK-GBC-Aldersgate-Energy-Efficiency-Briefing.pdf  
27
 European Commission (2020), ‘​Renovation wave | Energy​’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/energy-efficiency/energy-efficient-buildings/renovation-wave_en 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     10 

 
efficiency improvements, the Better Buildings Partnership in the UK or the Building 
Efficiency Accelerator initiative of the ​World Green Building Council​.  
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     11 

 
Improving water 
resource management 
The data ecosystem 
Water is a shared resource but is often managed in silos. In the face of climate 
uncertainty and a growing global population, coordination and agreement across the 
multiple sectors and stakeholders involved in how water use is managed is becoming 
more crucial. 
 
The biophysical conditions of water are traditionally tracked through metrics such as 
water availability, consumption, scarcity and groundwater levels; with increasingly 
good quality data available on each of these dimensions, through for instance the 
28
World Resources Institute’s ​Aqueduct tools​, the International Water Management 
Institute’s (IWMI) ​Water Data Portal​ or the ​U.S. Geological Survey​. However, to fully 
understand and manage water risks, decision makers need access to a variety of 
local datasets that describe both the biophysical parameters of water as well as how 
water resources are managed by relevant stakeholders. 
 
Diverse stakeholders, including corporations across all sectors, are already coming 
together to help support water conservation efforts. Technologies like the Internet of 
Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) are offering new opportunities to improve 
water quality and efficiency.  
 
The lack of granular level data poses a challenge to local coordination efforts, 
resulting in corporations and other water users, eg agricultural and industrial, making 
decisions without access to the right data. There are initiatives looking at filling this 
gap in local data, such as the World Resources Institute’s efforts to improve public 
29
water management by encouraging private sector companies to share the data they 
gather over time on the status of public water management. However, opportunities 
remain to increase the sharing of other data related to water use and water system 
resilience. As a ​2019 report​ by the International Water Association notes, ‘there is 
openness and a willingness to share information within the water sector and utilities 
should actively seek out these insights’. 
30
 
There are also significant regional differences with regards to the availability of data 
across the world. In some countries, eg in the US and Australia, data is available both 
at the local and national level. In many developing countries, data scarcity is a 
challenge even with regards to the physical side of water, although it is being 
28
World Resources Institute (2018), ‘​Mapping Public Water Management By Harmonizing And Sharing 
Corporate Water Risk Information​’, 
https://files.wri.org/s3fs-public/mapping-public-water-management-harmonizing-sharing-corporate-water-
risk-information.pdf  
29
World Resources Institute (2018), ‘​Mapping Public Water Management By Harmonizing And Sharing 
Corporate Water Risk Information​’, 
https://files.wri.org/s3fs-public/mapping-public-water-management-harmonizing-sharing-corporate-water-
risk-information.pdf  
30
CNBC (2020), ‘Water has become a big issue for Big Tech. But Microsoft has a plan’, 
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/10/13/water-has-become-a-big-issue-for-big-tech-but-microsoft-has-a-plan.
html  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     12 

 
mitigated by the increased use of remotely sensed data. A partnership between the 
International Water Management Institute​ (IWMI) and ​Digital Earth Africa​, for example, 
uses satellite imagery with the aim to ‘create easy to interpret data sets for 
governments, and others, to make more informed decisions about how to allocate 
water’.  
31
Increasing collaboration around data 
As more companies are making water commitments, there is an opportunity to 
strengthen public-private sector partnerships to improve water management at a 
local level through increased collaboration around data. Increased availability of this 
data could not only enable companies to better prioritise where they invest in efforts 
to reduce their water use in their operations and where they engage in replenishment 
efforts, but could also inform other actors – whether public or private – in their water 
management efforts. This would then contribute both to reduced emissions and 
increased resilience of water systems and users.  
Local data collaborations between utility corporations, regulators and other 
water users in water-stressed river basins to pilot water system resilience 
frameworks ​such as the one under development by the ​CEO Water Mandate​, could 
help review and improve existing models for the data infrastructure that best 
supports decision-making in the water sector.  
Such data collaborations could build on the work of existing initiatives at global, 
national and local levels, such as: 
 
●the ​UNEP-DHI Centre on Water and Environment​ mandated to measure the 
global status of water resources management,  
●the ​World Water Data Initiative​,  
●the ​Water Resilience Coalition​, 
●the ​Alliance of Water Stewardship’s International Water Stewardship 
Standard (AWS Standard)​ that provides guidance for businesses as well as 
public sector agencies to understand their water use and impacts,  
●The Nature Conservancy’​s efforts to bring together corporate and public 
sector interest, 
●the ​India Water Tool​ developed by WBCSD in collaboration with WRI, or 
●the ​California Water Action Collaborative​. 
 
31
Devex (2020), ‘​How satellite images could improve water management in Africa​’, 
https://www.devex.com/news/how-satellite-images-could-improve-water-management-in-africa-96807  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     13 

 
Reducing the climate 
impact of urban 
transportation 
The data ecosystem 
The transport sector is a major contributor to climate change — it accounts for about 
14% of annual emissions (including non-CO2 gases) and around a quarter of CO2 
emissions, which come from burning fossil fuels. Cities around the world are 
32
developing solutions to transition towards climate-friendly mobility systems.  
 
To support this transition, public and private sector stakeholders need access to the 
large amounts of data generated and held by different actors in the sector – including 
the new datasets enabled through the deployment of sensing devices – to inform 
planning, delivery and management of transport services. While public authorities 
often lack the ability to monitor and control the use of this data (data from transport 
providers has been described as ‘patchy’), the share of mobility data collected by 
33
the private sector is growing steadily. Public authorities could therefore benefit from a 
sliding scale of data access initiatives that reflects their needs and capabilities. This 
does not necessarily mean sharing raw data; some agencies might be well-served 
through a dashboard overview of key indicators, while others might want to access 
the raw data to carry out their own analysis. In other sectors, we can already observe 
different types of data access initiatives that are set to solve different problems with 
different solutions and timescales. Yet, they have the same underlying objective: 
34
building or strengthening the data infrastructure as part of their work . New data 
35
access and sharing initiatives are therefore much needed, to enable public and 
private interactions in sourcing, accessing and co-creating the data required to 
manage transport activities in a more sustainable way. 
 
New data-sharing models between public transport authorities, operators and 
industry leaders in the technology and automotive sectors are already emerging in an 
effort to deliver the right level of insights to identify and execute interventions that can 
improve the efficiency of urban mobility solutions, drive innovation in the field and 
reduce transport-related emissions. In 2020, the new ​European Green Deal​ has 
helped push forward many European cities in their efforts to become greener, and roll 
out cleaner, cheaper, and healthier forms of private and public transport.  
36
32
World Resources Institute (2019), ‘​Everything You Need to Know About the Fastest-Growing Source of 
Global Emissions: Transport​’, 
https://www.wri.org/blog/2019/10/everything-you-need-know-about-fastest-growing-source-global-emissi
ons-transport#:~:text=1.,emissions%20from%20burning%20fossil%20fuels​.  
33
 Green Alliance (2020), ‘​Smart and green Joining up digital and environmental priorities to drive the UK’s 
economic recovery​’, ​https://www.green-alliance.org.uk/resources/Smart_and_green.pdf  
34
 OECD/ITF (2016), '​Data-Driven Transport Policy​', 
https://www.itf-oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/data-driven-transport-policy.pdf 
35
ODI (2020), ‘​What do we mean by data access initiatives?​’, 
’​https://theodi.org/article/what-do-we-mean-by-data-access-initiatives/#:~:text=At%20the%20ODI%20we
've,the%20focus%20for%20the%20collaboration 
36
  European Commission (2019), ‘​A European Green Deal Striving to be the first climate-neutral continent​’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     14 

 
 
The global Covid-19 pandemic has also led to societies rethinking certain aspects of 
how they operate their cities, including plans to adopt more sustainable mobility 
systems, framed around equity of access, efficiency, safety and green mobility. 
37
Many new networks, initiatives and partnerships born in response to the pandemic 
have data and data sharing at their core. 
38
 
Disparities exist between developed and developing countries with the former 
outperforming the latter on most mobility policy goals according to the Global 
Roadmap of Action Toward Sustainable Mobility produced by the Sustainable 
39
Mobility for All Initiative in 2019. This suggests that at this point in time developed 
countries might offer a more conducive environment for implementing data-sharing 
initiatives.  
Increasing collaboration around data 
Bringing relevant datasets together​, such as emissions data from 
transportation, data on public transport journeys and data on the use of various 
modes of transportation, ​could help stakeholders better understand the 
impact of various government policies or investments​, for instance in areas 
such as cycle infrastructure, on transport practices and related emissions. The 
areas of highest impact to tackle climate change through better data collaboration, 
based on our desk research and stakeholder consultations, appear to be:  
40
 
●multimodal transportation solutions 
●Electric Vehicles (EV) charging  
●journey planning apps and services 
●Mobility as a Service (MaaS) model 
 
There are ​opportunities to strengthen existing initiatives around data sharing, 
such as the work of the WBCSD around enabling data sharing for transforming 
urban mobility, that will scale and replicate data sharing between global public and 
41
private sectors in mobility. Targeted pilots can support the creation and adoption of 
trustworthy data-sharing models.  
 
Western Europe seems to be an ideal geographical focus for piloting data 
collaboration initiatives ​given the maturity of existing legislation and anticipated 
37
Sustainable Mobility for All (2019), ‘​Global Roadmap of Action Toward Sustainable Mobility​’, 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/350451571411004650/Global-Roadmap-of-Action-Toward-Sustainable-
Mobility.pdf 
38
ODI (2020), ‘​Call for Proposals: A review of public–private mobility data sharing in response to the 
Covid-19 pandemic​’, 
https://theodi.org/article/call-for-proposals-a-review-of-public-private-mobility-data-sharing-in-response-t
o-the-covid-19-pandemic/ 
39
Sustainable Mobility for All (2019), ’​Global Roadmap of Action Toward Sustainable Mobility​’, 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/350451571411004650/Global-Roadmap-of-Action-Toward-Sustainable-
Mobility.pdf  
40
Transport Systems Catapult (2015), ‘​The Transport Data Revolution Investigation into the data required to 
support and drive intelligent mobility March 2015​’ 
https://ts.catapult.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-Transport-Data-Revolution.pdf  
41
WBCSD (2020), ‘​Enabling data-sharing: Emerging principles for transforming urban mobility​’, 
https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Cities-and-Mobility/Transforming-Mobility/Transforming-Urban-Mobility/
Resources/Enabling-data-sharing-Emerging-principles-for-transforming-urban-mobility  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     15 

 
regulatory and legislative developments as part of the European Green Deal, as well 
42
as the adoption of digital technologies that bring about a vast amount of new 
datasets. 
 
Data collaborations in this area could also build on the work of organisations such as 
the ​SLOCAT partnership​, the ​Connected Places Catapult​ in the UK, the ​London 
43
Data Commission Electric Vehicle Charging initiative​ or the work around the creation 
of ​mobility hubs​ in cities where different sustainable and shared transport modes are 
connected with each other. 
 
  
42
The Guardian (2020), ‘​What is the European Green Deal and will it really cost €1tn?​’, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/09/what-is-the-european-green-deal-and-will-it-really-cost-
1tn  
43
Transport Systems Catapult (2015), ‘​The Transport Data Revolution Investigation into the data required to 
support and drive intelligent mobility March 2015​’, 
https://ts.catapult.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-Transport-Data-Revolution.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     16 

 
Reducing waste 
The data ecosystem 
Waste not only pollutes our ecosystems, but its creation, distribution and disposal 
also contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. As per the UN Environment 
Programme, an estimated 11.2 billion tonnes of solid waste is collected around the 
world every year, and ‘the decay of the organic proportion is contributing about 5 
percent of global greenhouse gas emissions’.  
44
 
Reducing emissions originating from the generation of waste requires better tracking 
of different types of waste – including hazardous, electronics and construction waste. 
As Microsoft President Brad Smith acknowledged in a 2020 blog, ‘Today, there is no 
consistent, high-quality data about the amount of waste, the type and quality, where 
it is generated and where it goes. [...] Waste data needs a standardized methodology, 
better transparency and higher quality.’ 
45
 
Municipal waste data is generally more available in the Global North through the 
wide-spread use of scales and weighing systems, while cities in the Global South 
often seem to lack data on the volume of waste and its breakdown by types of 
material. Nevertheless, even in the Global North there is space for improving the 
consistency of reporting on waste data by the different stakeholders involved, 
including corporations and waste management companies. 
 
Electronic waste, or ‘e-waste’ - ‘items of electrical and electronic equipment and its 
parts that have been discarded by its owner as waste without the intent of re-use’, 
46
is of prime concern to a large extent due to the materials involved. E-waste can 
contain up to 60 different metals and chemicals, which, if disposed of incorrectly, can 
expose people to toxic substances or soil contamination. Currently only about 20% 
of e-waste is formally recycled. ‘The United Nations University predicts e-waste 
47
could nearly triple to 120 million tonnes by 2050 if nothing changes.’ ‘There is [also] 
48
little data on what happens to the rest, which for the most part ends up in landfill, or 
is disposed of by informal workers in poor conditions.’ At the same time, due to the 
49
gold, copper, platinum and other rare earth elements present in e-waste, it is 
estimated to present an ‘opportunity worth over USD $62.5 billion per year, more 
than the GDP of most countries and three times the output of the world’s silver 
44
 UN Environment Programme, (n.d.), ‘​Solid waste management​’, 
https://www.unenvironment.org/explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/cities/solid-waste-manage
ment  
45
 Microsoft (2020), ‘​Microsoft commits to achieve ‘zero waste’ goals by 2030​’, 
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/08/04/microsoft-direct-operations-products-and-packaging-to-be-
zero-waste-by-2030/  
46
 The Global E-waste Statistics Partnership (GESP), ‘​What is e-waste​’ 
https://globalewaste.org/what-is-e-waste/#:~:text=Electronic%20waste%2C%20or%20e%2Dwaste,the%
20intent%20of%20re%2Duse​.  
47
WBCSD (2019), ‘​UN, WEF, WBCSD and partners come together to address e-waste challenges​’, 
https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Circular-Economy/News/UN-WEF-WBCSD-and-partners-come-togethe
r-to-address-e-waste-challenges  
48
 ibid  
49
WEF, PACE (2019), ‘​A New Circular Vision for Electronics Time for a Global Reboot​’ 
https://docs.wbcsd.org/2019/01/A_New_Circular_Vision_for_Electronics.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     17 

 
mines.’ These materials are also essential for the transition to renewable energy as 
50
they are crucial for wind turbines, solar panels and electric car batteries. This 
51
provides an incentive for key stakeholders to work together to better track e-waste 
and make sure the materials are reused. 
Increasing collaboration around data 
As more companies are making ‘zero waste’ commitments and pledges to get better 
at reusing, repurposing and recycling the waste they produce, there is an 
52
opportunity to increase collaboration in multiple areas.  
 
One area where collaboration around data could help spur progress is around 
corporate general waste. There is an opportunity to ​improve reporting on the 
weight of commercial waste and its breakdown as per the different materials in 
it​ ​through collaboration between waste haulers and companies in different 
sectors ​of the economy. ​Pilots focused on a specific sector​, for instance the 
technology sector, ​and specific locations, for example a European or North 
American city​ that have generally better data availability, could help develop models 
for consistent tracking of commercial waste, contributing to better decision making 
by all stakeholders involved in the waste management process.  
 
Another area to explore is around ​measuring and improving the circularity of 
products, of the materials in them, and their packaging​. This can help companies 
work towards various commitments around circular product design and the use of 
more recyclable packaging. Data collaborations around these different aspects will 
53
require participation from a slightly different set of stakeholders. For example, in the 
realm of e-waste, mineral companies will be essential for setting up collaborations 
around tracking the materials in technology products. ​Specific objectives may 
include the development of open data standards for circular transition 
indicators for electronics, either focused on the products themselves or their 
packaging, or the development of a circular ID approach for better tracking the 
materials in electronics.​ The latter may be developed through a collaboration 
between technology companies and electronics recyclers. Similar approaches 
already exist in the fashion industry and the building sector, allowing us to learn 
54
from their experiences in the area. These data collaboration efforts are likely to be 
55
best executed at a global level.  
 
50
 WBCSD (2019), ‘​UN, WEF, WBCSD and partners come together to address e-waste challenges​’, 
https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Circular-Economy/News/UN-WEF-WBCSD-and-partners-come-togethe
r-to-address-e-waste-challenges  
51
 Bangkok Post (2020), ‘​UK report shines a light on e-waste​’, 
https://www.bangkokpost.com/opinion/opinion/2036171/uk-report-shines-a-light-on-e-waste  
52
 Microsoft (2020), ‘​Microsoft commits to achieve ‘zero waste’ goals by 2030​’, 
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/08/04/microsoft-direct-operations-products-and-packaging-to-be-
zero-waste-by-2030/ 
53
Ibid  
54
 Vogue Business (2019), ‘H&M, Microsoft, PVH Corp collaborate in circular fashion initiative’, 
https://www.voguebusiness.com/technology/circular-id-eon-sustainability-blockchain  
55
 Madaster Origination, (n.d.), ‘Material Matters’, 
https://www.madaster.com/en/about-us/why-a-materials-passport  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     18 

 
There may also be an immediate ​opportunity to boost the work of WBCSD on the 
circular economy and in particular on the development of circular transition 
56
indicators.  
57
 
The above opportunities can help inform not only company policies and practice but 
also long-term government policies across the world on the reuse and recycling of 
products and their packaging. Countries like the UK – which is reported to have the 
second largest amount of e-waste, after only Norway, and is ranked as ‘the worst 
offender of the ⅓ million tonnes of undocumented e-waste estimated to be exported 
from the European Union every year’ – could benefit from better data to track 
58
various aspects of their transition to a circular economy. 
 
Data collaborations in this space could also build on the efforts of organisations such 
as ​The Global E-Waste Statistics Partnership​ ​to monitor developments of e-waste 
over time, or the ​Capital Equipment Coalition​ of the Platform for Accelerating the 
Circular Economy (PACE).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
56
WBCSD, ‘​Circular Economy​’,  ​https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Circular-Economy  
57
 WBCSD, ‘​Circular Transition Indicators (CTI)​’ 
https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Circular-Economy/Factor-10/Metrics-Measurement/Circular-transition-i
ndicators  
58
Bangkok Post (2020), ‘​UK report shines a light on e-waste​’, 
https://www.bangkokpost.com/opinion/opinion/2036171/uk-report-shines-a-light-on-e-waste  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     19 

 
Annex 
Contributors  
We would like to thank those who have supported our research and provided their 
insights on the challenges of data sharing and opportunities for data collaborations to 
address significant climate issues, including representatives of: 
 
●Arup 
●Better Buildings Partnership  
●CBRE  
●C40 
●DHI 
●DNV GL 
●Ecolab 
●Icebreaker One 
●CHC Initiative  
●International Energy Agency (IEA) 
●International Water Management Institute (IWMI) 
●Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory  
●Open Environmental Data Project 
●Open Standards for Linked Organisations (OSLO) 
●Climate Action Tech  
●Gold Standard 
●Global e-Sustainability Initiative 
●Pacific Institute 
●Responsible Business Alliance (RBA) 
●Spend Network 
●The Nature Conservancy (TNC) 
●University of Melbourne 
●UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 
●World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) 
●World Economic Forum (WEF) 
●World Resources Institute (WRI) 
●United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) 
●Veolia 
●Volvo Research and Educational Foundation 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Accelerating progress on tackling the climate crisis through data collaboration     20 