

Data platforms, portals and civic
engagement
March 2022
Authors
Rachel Wilson and Tim Davies, with contributions from Anna Goss, Sonia Duarte and Olivier
Thereaux
Data portals are platforms that have enabled rapid growth of open data practice over the last
decade. But they have become a barrier and a bottleneck, requiring a radical rethink. During
this project we developed a set of insights, roles and proto-patterns that re-imagine portals as
connected services, rather than technology products; proposing new approaches to bridge
gaps in data discovery, quality and engagement, if data is to provide value for a wider audience.
Acknowledgements
With thanks to our sprint participants Siôn Elis Williams, Mysociety; Sam Roberts, Elizabeth
Watson and Isabella Fudge of Central Data and Digital Office; Ellen Goodman, the Open
Data Institute (ODI), Tim Davies and Anna Goss.
Thanks to our interviewees for their invaluable perspectives: Community organisers and
representatives Fausto Llopis, Nick Gardham, Richard Galpin, Steven Miller and Michael
Edwards; ODI and ODI alumni Lucy Knight, Fionntan O’Donnell, Leigh Dodds and Jeni
Tennison. Also Siôn Elis Williams, Mysociety; Andy Dudfield, Full Fact; Sam Roberts, Central
Data and Digital Office; Gea Mikic, Icebreaker One; Yiu-Shing Pang, UK Power Networks;
Andrea Abellán, DataJournalism.com; Patrick Lozeau, City of Montreal; EtaLab and EtaLab
alumni Mario Restuccia, Julieta Barado and Simon Chignard; Tim Binding, Thomas
Westhrope, Plymouth County Council.
And finally thank you to those who provided insights and feedback onearly thinking
including Ivan Begtin, Leigh Dodds and Eduardo Hernández Incháustegui
Licence
Content and imagery in this document is licensed underCC BY-SA 4.0
1of40

Introduction
The idea of open data is simple but powerful: theeconomic and social value of datais
maximised when it is made as open as possible. In particular, public data can be seen as a
civic resource feeding into many forms ofcitizenparticipation. However, more than a decade
since open data first began attracting policy attention, there is now a sense that much of the
potential value of both public and private data is going unrealised.
One of the most common methods for making data available – particularlyopen data– is
through a‘data portal’: a single online destinationthat hosts and curates datasets, and where
users can search for, and discover, data to use for some purpose or goal.
This project looked at data portals as a tangible object and lens to focus on the interaction
between data publishers and data users, particularly in relation to activities that aim to achieve
outcomes for the public good. In doing so, we have developed ideas that will be of relevance
not only to portal developers and stewards, but to anyone seeking to generate value from data
resources.
There are many ways ofcollecting, sharingandaccessingdatato realise its value, but
data catalogues and portals have been one of the mostconsistent features of the
data access landscape.The earliest open data portalswere launched as part of government
efforts to be‘  transparent, participatory and collaborative’,framing open data as a way of
enabling greater shared problem solving between citizens, the private sector and the state.
Hundreds of organisations, initiatives, and national and local governments havelaunched data
portalssince 2010, often as the flagship componentof an open data project. Today the
landscape covered by portals is vast, encompassing the fulldata spectrumfrom open to
restricted access; public, community-run and commercial operators;
Data portals, as single-destination technical products,remain an instinctive, intuitive, tangible
solution for data publishers whose needs they meet well. Whether focused on a topic or a
region, it is an approach taken byorganisationaldata publishers,regional data authorities,
academics, campaign groups, organisers andadvocates;or is used to focus efforts on
challenges such asclimate changeand othercomplexproblems.
Manydata assessment frameworks and maturity modelscite ‘civic engagement’ as the reason
for developing a data portal. However, they are often centred on encouraging citizens to
engage more with data, rather than on how data can support existing or potential topic-focused
public participation.
Regardless of their intended use, data portals are attracting growing criticism from both novice
and expert users. Most of the criticism stems not from rejection of the concept of open data
sharing or even portals completely, but because the promise of portals – enabling effective data
discovery and use – is difficult to realise with the current generation of portal platforms.
2of40

As the volume of data continues to grow, without substantial maintenance and refreshing of
existing portals, data users can find it increasingly difficult to find relevant data: either because
it’s not available on the portal, or because datasets are not documented in ways that make it
easy to find the right datasets at the right time.
Despite widespread acknowledgment that there are problems with data portals, there isn’t a
consensus on the way forward. This project looked at the future of data portals and uncovered
some new ideas and directions for further work.
Our approach
In October 2021, the Open Data Institute (ODI) set out to explore the future of data portals and
platforms for citizen engagement through a three-stage process:
●
We commissioned a landscape reviewlooking at theacademic literature, history of
portal development, and examples of emerging practice, and shared ourworking drafts
for public feedback.
●
We talked to a cross section of portal stakeholdersincluding data portal
managers and users, citizen advocate groups and intermediaries. Researchers at the
ODI carried out 16 informal interviews to understand the particular frustrations, pain
points and personal perspectives arising in their work with data portals. We shared early
findings from this work, and sought feedback during a fringe workshop of the ODI
Summit.
●
We carried out a service design sprintonline overtwo weeks, resulting in the
creation of initial user journey maps, suggestions for new roles for people, and a
collection of proto-patterns to explore in future data portal design.
This report describes this approach and shares the findings as of March 2022.
The portal problem
Data portals have a range of features and functions, and so it is important to be careful in the
language used to describe them and theideas we invoketo avoid talking at cross purposes: a
portal may be employed as a catalogue, a data sandbox, a host for documentation and
communication around data, a tool for data and quality management, or a provider of tools for
sense-making or collaboration.
As a minimum, the public face of a data portal provides data users with a list of datasets to
access, and behind the scenes will provide features to data publishers for entering or
harvesting and managing metadata. Depending on the intended users, a portal may also
3of40

include features such as faceted search, category browsing, discussion spaces, tools for data
visualisation, and provision for data hosting and access control.
There is arelatively small number of portal platformsavailable, including the open source CKAN
tools, and the commercial vendors such as Socrata, Open Data Soft and ArcGIS (alongside a
few other platforms, including alternative open source platforms developed in France and
Australia). Despite similar user interfaces, each of these platforms has different histories,
strengths and target markets.
Portals as civic participation platforms
Many ofthe assessment frameworks and maturity modelsput forward over the yearshave
cited ‘civic engagement’ as the logical endpoint for portal development, often framing this in
terms of engagementonthe portal. However, if welook at how data is used by potential portal
users’ throughout their journey to achieving specific goals, this offers a different way to think
about how data is made available and its relationship to engagement and participation with
broader systems. In particular, if users are defined as ‘citizens and citizen groups seeking to
realise social value by addressing topics that matter to them’, we can look at the range of
touchpoints they might have when searching for, accessing and using data. And we can gain
new perspectives onthe role of data platforms, includingportals, in supporting a vibrant public
realm.
Civic engagement around data is not just about citizens finding and using datasets: it also
involves conversations about the construction and sharing of data itself. For example, while
early open government data portals operated on the principle that only government data
matters for engagement and accountability, today that is rarely the case. The data driving public
decisions may also come from private sector data sources, analytics models, citizen science
and many other sources with different practices, relationships, norms and even power. Data
that helps people solve problems has to crossorganisationalor spatial boundaries. However,
discussions around data platforms and civic participation have often centred on how to get
users to engage more with the data, rather than emphasising how platforms can support
existing or potential processes of problem solving, value creation or topic-focused public
participation.
Gateway or pinch point?
Much as a kiosk or ‘one-stop shop’ at a council office functions as the focus of interaction
between a citizen and providers of local services, data portals generally sit at the boundary
between data practice inside an organisation, and data practice in the wider field, be that within
academia, local community or society as a whole.
Data from many different teams and departments is often placed onto a single hosting platform,
supported by a dedicated team with technical and procedural oversight. A single user interface
then hosts diverse datasets, sometimes with little in common other than that they originated in
4of40

the same organisation. The theory is that many different users can then draw on the available
data to generate value in a wide variety of ways, including supporting transparency, driving
efficiency, catalysing participation, engagement and co-production, or sparking and supporting
innovation.
While early portals opened a channel for data to flow, portals and single-destination data
platforms are today more often experienced as a pinch point.
Portals as a pinch-point (Author’s)
Criticism of data portals
Although open data strategies have matured over the last decade, data portals have not
evolved much, particularly from a data user perspective. The substantial and growing
academic literatureon open data portals is almostuniversally critical of their failure to meet user
needs for discoverable, usable data. Yet few studies propose how portals could be
re-designed; focusing instead on setting benchmarks that portals consistently fail to reach.
There is a tension between the ongoing need for platforms to surface data, yet the root causes
of problems with how that is done effectively go unaddressed. Portal product development has
been driven by internally, and sometimes politically, determined value rather than outcomes or
user need, which has resulted in features that are publisher and data centric. Despite the
5of40

development of features along a path to ‘product maturity’, few stakeholders appear to be
satisfied with the service that portals provide.
The underlying frustrations are as varied as the user needs and expectations. Computer
scientists are frustrated with the lack of machine-readable data available; political scientists with
the lack of tangible impacts on transparency; and human-computer interaction researchers with
usability challenges of portals failing to make data more accessible to non-technical users.
Enterprise approaches to data infrastructure and metadata management are leapfrogging the
current capability of public data portals, and although best practice models of data stewardship
have been transformed over the last decade, many open data initiatives remain centred on
struggling portal projects. Although agile and user-focused methods for digital service
development have become embedded across organisations including governments, they have
yet to be applied at scale to the data portal concept.
Identifying the gaps: discovery, quality and
engagement
Our interviews and desk research surfaced several common complaints about data portals,
revealing a complex picture of unmet user needs and goals. Some criticism stems from a gap
in expectation, others are dissatisfied with the data itself having been produced by opaque
internal processes, and others with their ability to make sense of the data they do find and turn
it to their own uses.
The criticism covers a range of technical, social, organisational and political aspects of how
portals work, and reflects failures around datadiscovery,qualityandengagement. Although
not exhaustive, there are challenge areas that future work needs to address:
The discovery gap: relevant data is hard to find
●
Missing or mismatched results for a specific search term.This could be
caused by unpublished data, uncollected data, inadequate metadata or a lack of
domain knowledge when the user is choosing search terms.
●
Users can’t tell if search results are suitable or relevant. This may be because
of inadequate or unsuitable documentation, or because the user lacks specialist
domain knowledge. Civic users often come with broad questions and yet are
presented only with specific, discrete and disconnected datasets.
●
‘Just give me the data’.Technical users especiallyare asking for frictionless
access without requiring wizards or query builders. They may want access to APIs
or automated data download.
●
‘Just give me the answer’.Non-technical users especiallyare looking for an
answer to a general question which the data may yield only after significant
analysis, or may only become apparent when combined with other datasets
●
Insufficient curation leads to discovery failures.Users may be unaware that
6of40

complementary datasets are available that would enhance value. For example,
collections can be more useful than individual datasets, or certain datasets are
more valuable when linked to key reference data.
●
Portals are not ‘of the web’making it hard to navigateconnections and onward
journeys from within the data because it is unstandardised, unconnected or
doesn't use the technologies of the web.
●
High value is hard to find. Crucial datasets suchas about companies or
geographical boundaries can be recombined to add value, but each new user
must start searching afresh.
The quality gap:the data available is not structured,timely, documented or otherwise fit
for use
●
Unsatisfactory qualitysuch as being incomplete, outof date, inconsistent
granularity or provided in file formats that are difficult to work with. This often
appears to be the result of an inadequate data pipeline or a lack of feedback
loops.
●
Duplication and superseded information. Some portalsare created to collate
data for a topic, yet the same datasets can be useful in many domains, leading to
copies. Users need specialist knowledge to find the original data source.
●
Data cleaning and analysis processes require reinventing the wheelbecause
data publishing is centrally controlled and feedback loops are lacking user input.
●
Data is not available in real-time in a format for automated access or
integrationis a common complaint for businesses,or those monitoring a
situation over time such as fact checkers.
●
Difficulty interpreting, comparing or combining datasets.In some cases, it is
inappropriate to do so because of incompatible collection methodologies; in other
cases, the challenge relates to specialist knowledge that would help dataset use.
The engagement gap:the pathways to make effectiveuse of data are poor
●
Data is disconnected from sources of information.Portals host data but often
the context, analysis and meaning are described on other websites. The two are
rarely linked and a user may start their search from either point
●
Publishing is ‘drop and run’ with little ongoing support.Publishers are familiar
with the nuances of the data they have collected and worked with, but the nature
and features of portals as products don’t incentivise continued knowledge sharing
with data re-users. For users, having access to data but not the technical skills or
literacy to make use of it can be frustrating.
●
Publishers don’t know where to expend effort.Publisherswould like to know
which data is the most useful and used, to help prioritise limited resources.
On a broader level, interviewees explained that the cost and effort involved in implementing
data portals as technical implementations are under-estimated. If the intention is to satisfy user
outcomes and needs, then, counter-intuitively perhaps, efforts might be better focused on
non-technical approaches.
7of40

Few, if any, of the problems outlined above are ultimately about the portal itself, or can be
solved by technical features alone. Rather, a wider range of interventions may be needed,
focused in particular on people and processes, alongside platforms. Any proposed
improvement to portals as a ‘product’ needs to take all these challenges into account if it is to
address the underlying issues.
Platforms re-designed as services: an exploratory
process
As the ‘pinch point’ model above demonstrates, civic engagement involving data is not
necessarilyaboutdata, but rather the interactionof agendas and people inside and outside of
various institutions. Supporting engagementthroughdata requires data infrastructure that is
accessible in the broadest sense, and that facilitates the exchange of both data and ideas.
Data users have meaningful goals andsocial practicesthat result in complex processes of data
seeking, access and use. Whereas most data portal maturity models focus mainly on technical
features, we should look at how to weave together people and organisations, over time and
across channels. This is the domain not of product design but ofservice design.
Service design techniques
Design sprints are a technique from service and product design that bring a team together for a
week to focus, explore, learn and stimulate ideas. We asked an experienced service designer to
facilitate a team through aservice-oriented designsprintexploring the questions ‘What could
the future of engagement with data look like if it is to better support civic participation? And
what can this tell us about the future of data platforms?’
Theframing and intention of the sprintwas to:
●
imagine a world without data portals; how might we address existing needs of people
wanting to interact with underlying systemsthroughdata.
●
identify the limits of technology and explore the roles people might play in creating a
successful data ecosystem connecting products, services and people.
●
produce artefacts and ideas that could advance conversations about data platforms
and initiatives. User journey and service-design artefacts can be an efficient way to
explain complex interactions and focus on solutions; inspiring conversation and
development of the next phase of services and tools.
8of40

Our modified service design approach
A design sprint is intended to give teams a shortcut to learning without the expense of
building and launching. A service-oriented approach means that outside of products, the
team also considered people, organisations, communities and data.
Research in the first phase uncovered many users of current portals, with their own goals
and needs. To design services for them all would normally require a more rigorous approach:
focused design sprints might focus on one shared goal across users, or take one user type.
Instead, we were keen to use the sprint outputs to instigate conversations between different
people working in the data portal space; to broaden and root conversations in user needs.
We decided to deviate from the traditional structure of a design sprint as pioneered by
Google Ventures, which ends with testing a prototype‘product’ on the final day, and more
closely followed aDesign Sprint 2.0orMinimum ViableServiceprocess.
Day 1 (½ day)Day 2 (½ day)Day 3Day 4Day 5
Scene settingBroadening
perspectives
User journey &
design ideas:
“Discovery”
(data user)
User journey &
design ideas:
“Quality”
(supply side)
Refining ideas,
storyboarding
and next steps
For more detail about the format and structure of the week, please refer to theconcept note
and collaborative Miro boards linked above.
Given the complexity of the problem – not least in terms of the distributed ownership of the
potential solutions – we set out to explore the topic and stimulate creative responses rather
than to definitively solve the problem. The outputs were ideas, nudges and service-based
journeys (sometimes represented by digital product interfaces), rather than a set of
high-fidelity prototypes which are ready to build.
Inputs: informing the design process
Any design process is shaped by the inputs that feed into it. We focused on bringing inputs
from a wide range of people and perspectives with experience of citizen engagement with and
through data.
People: insights from different stakeholders
The team included representatives from a government agency maintaining a national data
portal; research staff from the ODI involved in various data programmes; an outreach and
networks coordinator from a civic technology non-profit; and an open data researcher with a
background in civic participation. Video ‘witness statements’ were used as a substitute for
community representatives who were unable to attend.
9of40

What civic participation through data can look like
Community organiser in Walworth
“When you talk to people about data they are very interested. We had a street party in
Walworth, and put a stall up with data about a story, thinking nobody would come and visit it.
But there was a queue of people that wanted to talk to us.
“They're fed up because they're ... endlessly being surveyed for all kinds of things. They give
information to the organisations that support them, but nothing comes back. So they want to
participate. They don't want to participate on current terms.
“Mostly [data portals] comprise data that's collected for a system need. And we're interested
in collecting data that's for a community need.
“We might have what we call problem-solving booths, where you get a series of chairs in a
street and people sit down and start talking about data. Where that leads to is finding small
groups of engaged people in communities who really want to help us take this forward, they
want to be representing the group that will own the data, they want to participate in the
process. And then they get involved in either one or two groups: a design group that actually
designs what data are collected, how it's going to be owned, what will happen if somebody
else wants to use it, what they will pay if they are going to use it, what the feedback loops will
be and so forth. And then we have an ethics committee chaired by a professor of philosophy
or an ethics expert but then all of the other members are community members. If you come
on Wednesday night, there will be a Zoom call with women from Glasgow and Rotterdam.
And they'll be talking about ethics.”
Data Play
Town planners in Plymouth host regular events bringing together residents, designers,
entrepreneurs, technologists, families and local talent to “come together and play with the
data. These days are set in a fun, creative environment and focus on different themes and
some of the challenges the council faces”, for examplearts and culture, theclimate
emergency, orhousing and social enterprise.
The idea behind the family-friendly events is to “closethe feedback loop: appealing not just to
the reporting warriors but to have a richer conversation.”
Personas and roles: designing for diverse needs
Design sprint teams should include representation from people who will contribute to, benefit
from or be impacted by the products, systems or services in scope. Open data users that we
uncovered in the literature and interviews were distilled into 12 personas describingmotivating
goals and associated user needs. The personas aresummarised below, along with a
representative quote paraphrased from the interviews.
10of40

The roles exemplified by these personas may be combined or interchanged depending on
someone’s goal. For example, increasingly data publishers may also be data users of the same
platforms in different contexts, a pattern the ODI uncovered during research into futureneeds of
users of the London Datastore.
Roles for civic intermediaries
Many of these roles, such as the ‘curious citizen’, are found throughout the literature. Because
this project focused on the ambition of open data to support civic engagement, we spoke to
experts in the field of civic participation and organising, who told us that citizens rarely interact
with data directly. This isn’t necessarily because of data literacy issues, but because effective
civic influence requires intermediaries to advocate for citizens and interact with occasionally
complex power relationships; and the data comes later.
11of40

These intermediary roles are represented by the ‘citizen activist’, who may be campaigning on a
specific issue; the ‘community organiser’ who help citizens build momentum through
storytelling, often replacing lost local journalism; and the ‘community facilitator’ who work in
partnerships to collect and use data to understand and enable the flourishing of their
neighbourhoods.
Building diverse teams
A diverse range of perspectives makes for better design. Inspired by ideas ofdesign justiceand
inclusive practice, we offered a financial stipendfor up to three participants who might
otherwise have financial barriers to joining. These places weren’t taken up, however, whether
due to scheduling constraints, failure to reach those who might have wanted to participate,
inadequate effort made to reach the right people, or the way we positioned the sprint.
Our experience has implications for the future of the design of data services. Producing
something genuinely useful requires effort and flexibility to foster genuine participation.
Conscious and significant early effort should be made by anyone taking this work forward to
developinclusion strategies, nurture relationships,and engage with a wide range of
perspectives, adapting to any specific needs as they surface.
Perspectives: lenses for problem solving
Software platforms arecollections of ideasas muchas they are collections of code. Any design
process is informed, often implicitly, by a set of ethical, political, practical and philosophical
perspectives. These shape the values that guide design choices, and in any collaborative
design process it can be useful to surface and discuss driving forces, values and mental
models.
Throughout this project, and particularly during our design sprint, we adopted several different
lenses to examine the problem:
Function:Portals can function as catalogues; accountabilityplatforms, data stewardship tools,
engagement tools; metadata ‘factories’; data governance hubs; data QA pipelines,
switchboards, narrative platforms or engagement funnels. Each function could be designed
differently to deliver value in its specific way.
Value:Thevalue of datacan be measured in many ways:social, political, economic and
environmental. Depending onthe sector generatingthe value, data generates transparency,
efficiency, participation and innovation related value.
Operational model:Data infrastructure can be privately,publicly or community managed.
Interactions with the data via interfaces and people will differ accordingly.
Goal:Users will have a goal in mind that data canhelp with. They may be looking for data
(discovery); looking for answers in the data (quality); looking to understand or tell stories with
the data (meaning); or looking for change (engagement).
12of40

Mode of civic participation:Data may feed into political participation by informing citizens as
voters or campaigners; supporting collaborative participation to enable the co-production of
services; or oriented towards more neoliberal notions of citizen power based on informed
consumer choice in a marketplace of public services.
Ethical framework:Prioritisation of design optionsand approaches is shaped by implicit and
explicit ethical frameworks. The team considered three perspectives: aggregate consequences
of a technological artefact (Utilitarianism); how a design enables fundamental rights of users
(Deontology); and the kinds of character and behaviours that a design fosters (Virtue Ethics).
Theoretical frameworks:In particular, we made referencetoElinor Ostrom’s principles for
managing shared resources,Sherry Arnstein’s Ladderof ParticipationandWilson’s model of
information-seeking behavioursuch as active, passiveand ongoing search behaviours.
Our work was also informed by the lenses the ODI uses toexplore and explain complex
data access systems. For example, considering portalsasdata infrastructureembedded in
anecosystemofdata access modelswhich may beopen,closed or shared, including
collaborative and community owned models; managedintrustworthyandsustainableways.
Finally, the team paid particular attention torolesfor peoplein providing solutions, asking
about the skills or services that could be encapsulated by roles and jobs rather than by
technical platforms.
We couldn't address all these perspectives at once, and we were not able to apply them all
consistently. However, by identifying different ways of thinking about future portal design, this
work forms a set of resources for future work to build on, supporting a more rounded
conversation.
Insights: deeper understanding through design
The early stages of our design sprint uncovered key insights that helped to focus work on
potential solutions. Below are some of these.
Broken journeys
Putting ourselves in the shoes of data users searching for relevant data to address some civic
goals - “I want to help lonely people in my community”, “I am campaigning for a new local
allotment with water supply” and “I am writing to my MP with evidence fuel poverty is worsening”
- resulted in the following user journey map depicting the routes when we were unable to achieve
our goal:
13of40

User journey map for broken journey
Our experiences corroborated complaints expressed by interviewees, including:
The false promise of a single shopfront.Portals atfirst appear to offer ‘all the data in one
place’, but from the perspective of users seeking data to solve a particular problem, they rarely
deliver this. Portals are often built around organisations or particular domains, whereas
individuals seeking data to solve problems often need data that crosses these boundaries. This
is a driver behind suggestions to create new topic-focused portals.
Dead ends and 404s.Datasets usually need some degreeof maintenance. Several of our
hypothetical searches either surfaced the metadata for outdated datasets (‘I can find a dataset
from 2017; is there anything more recent?’), or 404 pages (‘Hmm, it seems the portal has
linked me off to a dead dataset’).
Interpreting data takes specialist knowledge. Muchof the data on portals is ‘data
exhaust’: collected for one purpose, but now available for others. To work out whether it can be
repurposed requires a degree of knowledge about the background of the data, or knowledge of
alternative data sources that might be available. This is a tricky problem to solve with
technology and tools alone.
Search sets up particular expectations.Most searchesbegin with a search box – whether
on the portal itself or a search engine – but finding appropriate datasets often involves a more
exploratory process. Our team struggled to use faceted ‘drill-downs’ to refine searches since
they are designed around the organisational structures of the portal creators, rather than the
problems, positions and capabilities that users arrive with.
14of40

Portals only surface the data thatiscollected.However, in some cases, the team sought
data that wasn’t yet collected (or published). Portals offer few pathways to support users
reaching data dead ends to either adapt their information-seeking strategies, or to consider
ways of creating the missing data through community action.
There are limited incentives for publishers to improve their dataand few ways for users
to flag their interest in using unpublished data, or to report problems with discovery or data in
ways that feed back into improvements.
Each encountered problem represents a ‘broken journey’, ie, a moment where someone may
give up. While this is by no means an exhaustive list, these challenges shaped the solution
space the team went on to explore.
Design principles
Recognising that values and ethical ‘tensions’ can unconsciously shape system design, the
team created design principles to use as ‘ethical touchstones’ throughout the design process
1
.
Principles are useful for prioritising effort and design choices, for example see Lou Downe’s
principles for a ‘good service’, including:
●
Enable each user to complete the outcome they set out to do
●
Require no prior knowledge to use
●
Have no dead ends
●
Be usable by everyone, equally
●
Make it easy to get human assistance
Making of maps
Mapping exercises clarify and combine the experiences of the representatives in the room. The
team collaboratively produced two maps of activities and interactions, looking for key moments
to focus on: one for someone trying to find and use data; and another from the perspective of
an organisation identifying, collating, publishing and updating data, acknowledging that open
data is part of a wider landscape of data governance.
1
See Appendix C for more details.
15of40

Our two maps collated
Maps like these can be codified into user journeyblueprints. We created blueprints for an
example broken journey, above, and for an alternative model later in this document.
Bridging three gaps
Three main service gaps emerged from opportunity grouping and mapping activities, and
became our framing throughout the sprint:
●
The data discovery gap.If it exists, people shouldbe able to find and understand the
data or information that meets their needs.
●
The data quality gap.Data that people do discovershould be of the highest possible
quality and fitness for purpose.
●
The engagement gap.People should leave their engagementwith data services and
products with greater confidence to use or contribute data effectively to influence or
interact with systems of change.
The next two sections further develop some of the ideas that emerged in the sprint and
describe how they might address some of these gaps.
16of40

The data discovery gap
The most common complaints around data portals were 'missing/mismatched results' and
'unable to tell if results are suitable', so we focused on the general issue of discovery first.
User journey map focused on looking for and finding data
During the mapping exercise, we made the following observations:
●
The motivating trigger for someone starting their search is emotional, whether rooted in
concern, anger or passion. Someone is motivated to find out more, or to use data to
bring about an action in the real world.
●
The search for data might start with a quick internet search, which is often
unsuccessful.
●
At this point, people either reduce their ambitions, or look for help. Without data-savvy
friends or connections, the journey often ends here.
●
The three main outcomes from the process are:
○
Success:leave feeling empowered by knowing or beingable to do something -
even if the original assumptions about data have evolved.
○
Give upand file away any progress for another day- assuming the original
motivation has not diminished.
○
Shift focusto filling the gap: either by engagingwith the organisation via FOIs
or other means, or start planning alternative data collection, perhaps locally.
This generated opportunity questions such as:
●
How might we move from a search paradigm to a discovery paradigm?
●
How might we signpost engagement links and pathways?
●
How might we help people find their unknown unknowns?
17of40

Keeping these questions in mind, the sprint team carried out iteration and recombination of
ideas into some suggestions.
Connecting services to recover from broken journeys
Through introducing services, we can help our data seeker recover from broken journeys, for
example:
●
Provide community-based starting points in social spaces, eg a library or citizens advice
bureau.
●
If a user starts their journey online, provide several opportunities at different points to
connect with experienced guides.
18of40

Storyboard showing a composite journey based on sketches and ideas contributed by participants
The storyboard above introduces a new role for a ‘dataguide’, a person who acts as a data
expert and problem solver. They may not have all the answers at their fingertips, but they have
a support network of connections that can help the data-seeker move closer to their goal.
A broken discovery journey
Shanti is a community organiser supporting a local community wishing to create new
growing spaces with access to water.Community memberssuggest local derelict sites but
need to find out who owns the land.
Shanti starts with a web search: for 'Land ownership Southville', but doesn't find any useful
resources ❌. She searches on the local council website, finding only low-resolution PDF
maps when she needs granular data ❌. She tries the 'Open Data' pages of her district
council but finds nothing ❌.
Portia works for Southville Council and is tasked with publishing details of council owned
land.She converts lists of technical spreadsheetsinto user-friendly PDF maps to upload to
the council's data portal. She never hears if anyone is using the data or not.
Services to bridge the discovery gap
Portia uses aPublishers ToolkitandData ServiceStandardto prepare a collection of
data that will meet a variety of user needs, andSignpostsData in Contextby creating links
to the collection on land-related pages and news articles on the council website.
When Shanti searches on the local council website she finds the map images and links to the
open data portal with a full collection of technical data.
Not knowing how to analyse the data, Shaniti finds a suggestedOnward Journeyto make
an appointment with aData Guide. Shanti remembershaving seen an advert for the Data
Guide in her local library and books an initial 15-minute chat.
19of40

The Data Guide discusses Shanti’s problem and forwards links to a journalistic project
mapping land ownership and helps her pay a private water company for data about water
supply; finally the guide connects Shanti with a ‘local mapping data’ meetup group to help
her make sense of the data.
User journey map for journey with new services
The organisational context: bridging the quality gap
Our second day’s focus was on the theme of ‘looking for answers in the data’, touching on
issues of quality, feedback loops and organisational context.
The portal shop window hides the complex organisational processes involved in creating,
collating, curating and sharing data. Work to make data more widely available is often
competing with other organisational priorities, and data publishing practices can often rely on a
small number of people, creating points of failure when these people are unavailable or change
jobs. This raises the question of how the toolbox of technology and services available to
increase engagement with data could be designed for a better fit into real-world organisational
practice, and bring thehidden labourof data creators,stewards and managers into view.
20of40

For data to be useful it needs to be of sufficient quality. Indeed, data quality issues feature
strongly in literature and in our interviews, but it canmean many different things, such as
timeliness, completeness, accuracy or continuity. For the purpose of the design sprint, we
defined quality in the broadest sense as being fit for the original purpose for our civically
motivated user.
Data may be missing because it is not collected; ‘official’ data may not represent the concerns
of people on the ground; quantitative statistics might not adequately capturepeople’s rich
qualitative experiences; and declining data collectionand maintenance may have taken its toll
on its usefulness.
The exploration resulted in the following journey map:
User journey map focused on organisational process and feedback loops for data quality
Key observations from the journey mapping activity were:
●
The trigger for publishing is often some kind of policy mandate, either FOI, transparency
or open by default; rarely is it to proactively support an active civic concern.
●
Two main routes exist to improve quality: establishing pipeline processes to include
documentation and validation, and user feedback loops of various kinds.
●
Some quality issues do have technical solutions such as developing or enforcing
standards or improving processes for data collection and defining metadata. Some are
political in nature, and it is important to recognise the organisational reality into which
any solution needs to integrate.
●
If all feedback mechanisms are mediated through the portal, they become primarily
technical issues and additional pinch points.
●
Meaningful participation is one data improvement ‘engine’ by which people can
influence, improve or enhance institutions, organisations and systems.
●
Without maintenance and feedback loops, the most likely outcome is that data sits
unused and its usefulness declines.
21of40

This prompted the following questions:
●
How might we close the loop between owner, publisher and possibilities for learning?
●
How might we redesign the portal as a data collection generated for and used by
providers of services, not the other way round?
●
How might we engage communities in decisions around collecting, using and sharing
data?
●
How might we guide people who are disappointed by what they find towards ways of
creating and improving what they were looking for?
Routes to improve feedback loops and improve data quality
Using a publisher’s toolkit - a suite of tools used throughout the data publishing pipeline - could
help data stewards to:
●
produce richer context, history, purpose, features and limitations of published data
●
manage user expectations through change-logs and roadmaps
●
consider the external re-use of the data and build the business case to invest in data
publication and maintenance
●
make internal processes more visible.
Opening data creates a window into organisations, but to create instead a doorway that
supports two-way dialogue requires an emphasis on people and process. By creating
in-person roles and increasing accessible feedback loops, data stewards can broaden their
understanding of data quality. For example, community coordinators or embedded community
data fellows can seek out data ‘use cases’ and be empowered to bring about changes or
support new initiativesto enable community goals.
22of40

A broken quality journey
Shanti is a community organiser working in partnership with local doctors and housing
authorities interested in addressing issues of loneliness.The local community centre records
footfall in local community spaces, and carries out regular surveys about the wellbeing of
local residents, which is not shared with mental health service providers ❌. The partnership
would like to understand how to use their local community assets such as benches, cafes
and green spaces to support local walking groups. Data they find online is organised at the
borough level, when they need it at the neighbourhood level  ❌.
Portia works for Southville Council and is tasked with publishing details about mental health
to support policy.The council uses proxy measuresabout income and density of health
services to estimate wellbeing in order to target services. Portia suspects the data doesn’t
capture local lived experience ❌.
Services to bridge the quality gap
Portia wants to validate her assumptions, so she contacts Southville’sEngagement
Coordinator for the Community,who convenes a workshopwith the neighbourhood
partnership including Shanti.
Shanti tells the council that data needs to be filterable by ‘neighbourhood’ for it to be useful
to the partnership. Collections of data are also too focused on financial concerns; Shanti
suggests adding a register of community assets as defined by residents.
Portia reviews the data collection in light of the new information She uses thePublishers
Toolkitprocess to improve the dataset and documentation,and theData Service
Standardto redesign interaction touchpoints withthe council data team.
Shanti applies for a one-yearData Fellowshipto workwith the data publishers and share
community insights to improve data practices. Shanti works with localEngagement
Coordinators,Data Guidesand community organisersto collectively design a new data
initiative to record and share data about local assets and resident’s surveys. The team uses
thePublishers Toolkitto design a microsite usingweb standards such as schema.org and
DCAT metadata so the community group's data is more discoverable through Google
Dataset Search and other tools.
Progressing to prototypes
The modified design sprint process did not lead us to a single design, but instead to several
provocations, proposals, patterns and sketches of potential roles that might exist around future
portals. These fragments are intended to be the starting point of a conversation, rather than as
implementation-ready designs.
23of40

Roles
Several of the ideas proposed in the design sprint imagine the creation of new roles around the
portal: from data guides, to community managers and data fellows. To provoke further
conversations around these ideas, we’ve sketched outline role descriptions in prototype job
specifications, summarised below:
Data Guide
A local point of contact for people seeking to make use of data. Helping them progress onto
the next stages of their data journeys. Answering questions, recommending next steps and
making connections.
Engagement coordinator for the community
A local data champion, working with organisations who need to better understand data as it
relates to communities. Influences the way data is used for collective benefit, and identifies
opportunities for community-created datato feed intopolicy making.
Data Fellow
Embedded within a data publisher, authority or organisation to represent a community’s voice
when implementing data strategy. Supports organisational capacity to create, manage, share
and use data to deliver their mission in ways that produce positive civic outcomes.
A Venn diagram showing how roles might overlap and interact with each other
24of40

The beginnings of a set of new patterns
Anyone collaborating to take these ideas forward, for example, portal creators, vendors, service
providers and intermediaries, could benefit from a shared language. One way to create
shareable, adaptable ‘templates’ is to use the format of design patterns:
a design pattern is a general repeatable solution to a commonly occurring
problem... A design pattern isn't a finished design that can be transformed
directly into code. It is a description or template for how to solve a problem
that can be used in many different situations
2
.
Full pattern development takes iterative refinement and testing, but we’vedrafted some
‘proto-patterns’based on the ideas and sketches createdduring the design sprint, structured
around the three key ‘gaps’ identified in our earlier research. A few examples from each
category are summarised below.
Anti-patterns
Some approaches have been the focus of considerable effort in both technical design and
project implementation, but we would argue, take portals in counter-productive directions.
Counter to the priorities set out in software and initiative roadmaps we argue that data
platforms that aspire to support citizens:
●
should notlist all the re-uses of a dataset. Thisdemands moderation and curation
efforts that few organisations are placed to take on, leading to ‘maintenance burden’.
●
should notprovide generic automated data visualisation.Attempts to provide
'preview' tooling that allows users to directly access and visualise the contents of any
dataset on the platform rarely provide a satisfying user experience. Effort is better
placed on summarising data, and leaving visualisation to bespoke tools or analysis.
Anti patterns like these, when set against the proto-patterns below, help distinguish the different
directions that result from taking a service and user-focused design approach, instead of a
dataset and technology-centric one.
Patterns for bridging the discovery gap
Ideas that surfaced in the design sprint addressed data discovery from various directions: from
an improved multi-step, user-centric search experience on technology platforms, through to
in-person data guides. These can be expressed as a design pattern as follows:
●
Tailor the search experience to the user. One searchinterface need not serve all
user types. Alternative search and discovery user experiences and interfaces can target
users with different needs and goals. Take into consideration that some journeys may
start elsewhere.
2
Source Making (no date),Design Patterns
25of40

●
Provide onward journeys. Whether a user has discovered the data they need or not,
offer a next step they can take on their journey.
●
Connect people to data guides. A data guide is someone able to talk with a potential
data user, to understand their goals and needs, and help them shape their strategies for
data discovery. Guides may be able to signpost to particular resources or approaches
to make better use of data.
●
Publish datasetsin context. Instead of starting fromdataset metadata in search
results and linking to uses of the data, the link should go the other way: key uses of a
dataset should link to the data and allow search engine crawlers to discover data where
it is being used.
Patterns for bridging the quality gap
Some of the ideas proposed to address the data quality gap focus on providing better tools
and processes for data stewards and creating a pipeline to provide data within a
service-oriented framework:
●
Provide a Data Publishers Toolkit. Data publishersuse a set of resources to guide
them through the process of publishing and maintaining a data resource.
●
Scaffolded dataset feedback and requests. Help usersto write good feedback or
data requests, and support organisations to respond well to these requests.
●
Develop a service standard for datasetsand collections.Datasets can go through
a draft, alpha, beta and live cycle, shaping them to meet identified user needs.
Patterns for bridging the engagement gap
New roles and ways of working enable new forms of engagement, including in physical space.
Note that these ideas emerged from the discussions around feedback loops to improve quality:
suggesting a positive relationship between engagement and quality.
●
Publish a 'Data Yearbook'.Establish a yearly 'publication'which features information
on dataset updates, featured datasets, and planned activities for the year ahead.
●
Provide a switchboard service. Asupport switchboardwould connect people with
relevant forms of support to help them use data: from a short call with a data guide,
through to commissioning detailed data science support.
●
EngagementCoordinator for the Community. This roleacts as a bridge between
data stewards in an organisation, and potential data users outside of the organisation:
organising events and activities, brokering conversations, creating resources, and
making connections that improve discovery, quality and use of data.
From pinch point, to powering participation
Whatever the future direction, we must keep in mind that no single service or product can meet
all user needs. The figure below takes a selection of the patterns and roles suggested in the
26of40

design sprint,
3
and imagines how they could be integrated in a broader suite of services and
products. In this way, the data portal ceases to be a pinch point, but becomes the lynchpin in a
pyramid of data discovery, quality improvement and engagement, and is able to power a far
wider range of citizen engagement activities.
Portals integrated with a suite of example connected services and products (Source: Authors)
Many of the above patterns and roles can be adapted to a wide range of user groups. For
example, a ‘switchboard service’ could also operateinsidegovernment or other organisations,
to help data seekers to better connect with internal data science teams; publisher toolkits and
service standards for data might improve the usability of data for entrepreneurial re-users by
more clearly signposting data that is appropriate to build commercial services on top of.
Sprint learning
In addition to the practical artefacts, the sprint team found there were other learnings that can
be taken forward into future work:
Simple portal interfaces hide significant labour.Re-thinking data platforms for civic
engagement requires us to consider different facets and dimensions of how data flows from
organisations to outside re-usersandhow communication,conversations and change flow too.
Effective civic engagement around data doesn't require a portal.Portals performmany
functionsthat could be separated and focused to meetspecific needs. Product development
could focus less on social features, and more on integration with services and improving
3
Not all of these are described in this document. Refer to theproto-patternsfor more details.
27of40

touchpoints between the publishers and users of data.
Data needs to work for everyone.Data sharing needs to be multifaceted if it is to work for
everyone. Without due consideration of all the perspectives and lenses described above,
designers will capture an incomplete picture and therefore tend towards incomplete solutions.
A problem of complexity rather than maturity.Theframing of product ‘maturity’ is
potentially misleading since it suggests a direct path to an agreed end state. This research
suggests the answer to the ‘portal problem’ is not features, but an interacting mix of joined up
services and products tailored to particular user needs, each with their own path to maturity.
Co-design methods need a new framing of co-investment.Co-design methods work
best with a diverse group. Financial compensation might enable freelancers or those who aren’t
fully employed to participate, but there are others with valuable experience who work full time.
We need new compensation arrangements between employers and co-design organisers.
Finally,do we need to start talking about socialinfrastructure as much as data
infrastructureto get the best from both?
Progressing prototypes to pilots
The ideas and learnings above are illustrative of what might emerge from a co-design process
with a user-centred focus. This process has demonstrated there is still much to learn and
improve about data engagement, so our intention is to share these ideas and iterate them. Data
portals may be a step on the path to effective data engagement, but the journey does not end
with them.
We’d like to work with current portal managers and existing data service providers such as
DataKind or Digital Candle to pilot new service touchpoints, interfaces and roles. Focusing on a
single user or common user need, we’d like to trial new services and ask new questions such
as:
●
How might we scale services and share lessons?
●
How might we improve the pipeline of ideas between research and implementers?
●
How might we assess value for investment in people-driven services to complement
technical products and make a business case?
Conclusions and recommendations
In too many cases, journeys to discover and use data end in failure. Data goes undiscovered;
datasets discovered are unusable; and opportunities for connection, learning and conversation
are missed. Many open data and data sharing projects have been relying on technical models,
portals and practices that are creating a pinch point, rather than being enablers for social value.
28of40

Without action, there is a risk that portals will continue to decay, collapsing under the weight of
maintenance effort, but crowding out other activities that could improve data accessibility and
use and better realise the value of data.
Portals are still a go-to for data publishers because they seem to meet their needs fairly well.
But more is needed to enable positive outcomes for data users, especially citizens and their
advocates, since the solutions that meet their needs are unlikely to be technical, but rather to
bridge disparities of domain knowledge and power.
While there are undoubtedly some technical fixes that can be applied to existing platforms, in
this report we show that readiness for thethird waveof open dataneeds a wider range of
interventions. Reframing data engagement as engagement with policy and organisational
systems through data; and employing social, political and organisational tools and practices
offer new ways to respond to the complexity of user needs.
A decade of learning about what works, and what doesn’t in open data practice should inform
the design of future work, as should approaches from the field of service design.
This project provides an initial exploration of new ways forward. We’ve identified four particular
calls to action, each with an invite for collaboration:
Focus onservicesfor data access and participation
Instead of investing in technology, invest in people and processes. We’ve shown how taking a
service design approach can lead to a range of different solutions to long-standing challenges
for data access, quality and use. Proto-patterns andservice standardsoffer starting points for
future design work or pilots.
We are particularly keen to investigate how simple switchboard and data guide services could
work in practice. We’re seeking partners who might take forward some service prototypes for
validation: get in touch if that might be you.
Focus on tools for better data stewardship
Data needs to live closer to where it is talked about in context, and closer to the people who
created and care about it. That means less focus on metadata captured in webforms, and
more focus on tools that guide data stewards through the process of planning and publishing
collections of data designed around user needs.
The kind of tools need not be technically complex, expensive or monolithic. From template
documents to lightweight static-site builders, we offer suggestions for how to do data
description and engagement differently. Many of the tools needed already exist in some form.
The challenge is bringing them together and refining them. We’re on the look-out for resources
to work on this later in 2022.
29of40

Experiment with new roles
You might already employ people who act informally as ‘data guides’, or ‘engagement
coordinators’, or you might be an organisation in need of a ‘data fellow’ to help improve how
you collect, manage and share data for social outcomes. Consider adding new elements to
existing roles, or recruiting for new posts as alternative ways in which (open) data initiatives can
overcome barriers to engagement.
We’re keen to hear about existing roles that facilitate data access, and about evidence you
might have of the value they generate.
Continue the conversation
If you are also working in this space and see potential in these ideas and how they might open
up the value of data currently in portals, we’d love to discussways to develop these processes
and patternsfurther.
We’re keen to run future iterations of this process: testing the outcomes from this first iteration,
and exploring new dimensions of generating social value from data.
We’d love to hear from you: get in contact here
30of40

Appendix A: Links to landscape review blog posts
Introduction
Exploring the past, present and future of data portals and citizen engagement
Terminology: When is a portal not a portal?
Looking at the language used about, and around, data portals
Technology: A genealogy of data portals
Exploring the history of portal platforms, the evolution of portal technology and the shifting
focus of portal providers
Research: The pressure on portals: an hourglass approach
The first of a two-part literature review on open data portals, and introducing the concept of a
'portal hourglass'
Academia: Evidence and insights: other findings from research
The second post of a two-part literature review looking at open data portals
Portals in practice: Selected examples of data portals
Selected data portal examples that illustrate interesting features, developments and
experimentation
Organisational: The people and processes behind the portals
What roles are required for an effective portal? And can portal design better support a diversity
of stakeholders?
Engagement: Portals and participation
A short exploration of different perspectives on citizen participation and implications for data
portal design
  Speculation: Focussed futures: the portal as...
What if a portal had just one job to do? And could do it well? Speculations on portal futures...
Design Sprint - Part 1: Understanding the challenge
Reporting back on a design sprint exploring the future of data portals and civic engagement
Design sprint - Part 2: Bridging the gaps
Sharing proto-patterns developed through Data Portals and Civic Engagement design sprint
31of40

Appendix B: Design sprint agenda, format and
co-design activities
Two initial sessions involved presentations and activities to establish the problem space and
broader context, including: the history of portals and participation, and their functioning in the
data sharing ecosystem; common user complaints from literature and interviews; user goals
and needs; ethical approaches; and codifying our collective intentions for the system in ‘design
principles’
4
.
Everyone was encouraged to make notes of interesting problems and opportunities throughout
the foundational sessions, and during a hands-on activity to search for data putting ourselves in
the shoes of a data user. Observations were captured in the form of ‘how might we’ questions,
such as ‘how might wehelp people leave portals feelingmore empowered, not less’.
Opportunities related to the following themes:
●
helping people discover more relevant things
●
understanding the current availability and usage of data
●
organisational set up
●
supporting understanding of the data and what it means
●
translating data into meaningful stories
●
self description / porousness
●
helping people feel empowered to use the data to support action.
Two of these were selected as the focus for the first ‘creative’ session: ‘helping people discover
more relevant things’ encompassing ‘supporting understanding of the data and what it means’.
Two deep-dive ‘creative’ days followed this pattern:
1.A deeper dive into the context and problem, including user ‘witness statements’.
2.Create storyboards of current process, looking for pain points, broken journeys, key
moments and opportunities.
3.Share examples of where the same problem has successfully been solved in another
context.
4.Create sketches of creative and imaginative solutions to the problem.
5.Select and combine the best ideas and develop them into a more pragmatic proposal.
6.Vote on inspiring aspects of all proposals; recombining them into a final storyboard.
A second creative day focused on the organisational perspective: exploring feedback loops and
ways to improve data quality to help users find meaningful answers in the data. And, finally, a
session exploring roles, key messages and a plan to take ideas forward.
See images below of the collaborative workboards and sketches.
4
See Appendix C for more detail.
32of40

Further reference
Design Sprint concept note and planning
Tim Davies write up
Collaborative workboards
For a flavour of the design sprint, see the overviews below. (Links to the full Miro boards are
below each image)
Session 1: Defining and experiencing the problem; introducing context
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVOS-ehxc=/
33of40

Session 2: Broaden our perspectives; establish design principles
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVORWWghA=/
34of40

Session 3: Exploring problems with “Discovery”
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVOQb16ow=/
35of40

Session 4: The organisational perspective: exploring feedback loops and quality
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVOPGCKAc=/
36of40

Session 5: Storyboard for feedback loops; and planning next steps
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVOO_49l8=/
37of40

Appendix C: Ethical frameworks leading to Design
Principles
Design principles
The team considered three ethical frameworks each motivating different kinds of design
questions, from focusing on the aggregate consequences of a technological artefact
(Utilitarianism), to considering how a design responds to fundamental rights of users
(Deontology), or the kinds of character and behaviours that a design fosters (Virtue Ethics).
Having considered those perspectives, we drafted a set of design principles – rooted in values
– as an ethical touchstone to refer to throughout the sprint:
●
Serve those who need it most.
●
Provide helpful onward journeys – ‘the link is as important as the node’.
●
Support conversations – there is not always a fixed answer.
●
Always be a welcoming host.
●
One platform for all –- don’t rely on ‘back channels’ that expert users who are
‘in-the-know’, or internal organisational stakeholders, can use to get better access to
data or answers.
Bibliography
1.African Minds, IDRC, Davies, T., Walker, S., Rubinstein, M., and Perini F., (2019),The
State of Open Data: Histories and Horizons
2.Bennett Institute for Public Policy and Open Data Institute, (2020),Valuing data
3.Big Data and Society, Micheli, M., Ponti M, Craglia M., (2020),Emerging models of data
governance in the age of datafication
4.Community Organisers, (2021),What is Community Organising?
5.Costanza-Chock, S., (2020),Design justice
6.D'Ignazio, C. and Klein, F., (2020),Data feminism(principles)
7.DataPortals.org, (2021),List of data portals
8.Davies, T., (2021),Data Portals and Citizen Engagement
9.Davies, T., (2021),Patterns for Data Platforms
10.Davies, T., (2021),Reflections on “Participatorydata stewardship: A framework for
involving people in the use of data”
11.Diaz, J. & Breux, S., (2021),Reusers of open publicdata: The case of Montreal.
38of40

12.Digital Science, Hahnel M., McIntosh L., Hyndman A., Baynes G., (2020),The State of
Open Data 2020
13.Dodds, L., (2021),Why are we still building portals?
14.Downe, L., (2022),15 Principles of Good Service Design
15.Geospatial Commission, Watson, C., (2021),The secretto great geospatial data
portals: start with the user
16.Gov.UK, (2021),Service Standard
17.Gov.UK, Downe, L., (2016),What we mean by servicedesign
18.Gov.UK, Siodmok, A., (2020),Introducing a 'Governmentas a System' toolkit
19.IEEE Access, Enríquez-Reyes, R., Cadena-Vela, S. and Fuster-Guilló, A., (2021),
Systematic Mapping of Open Data Studies: Classification and Trends From a
Technological Perspective
20.International Conference on Electronic Government, Alexopoulos, C.,  Diamantopoulou,
V., Charalabidis, Y., (2017),Tracking the Evolutionof OGD Portals: A Maturity Model
21.International Conference on Information Systems, Jetzec, T., Avital, H., Bjorn-Anderson,
N., (2013),Generating Value from Open GovernmentData
22.Kotorić, D, (2021),The state of open-data design
23.Locke, H., (2021),User-centred vs human-centred design
24.Mali, D, (2020),Comprehensive Study of Open DataPlatforms
25.National Academies Press, (2018),Open Science ByDesign:   Realizing a Vision for 21st
Century Research (summary)
26.Open Data Camp, (2017),Do we need portals for opendata?
27.Open Data Institute, (2021),A framework to help usthink about data access
technologies
28.Open Data Institute, (2018),Creators of tools foropen data? Steal this
29.Open Data Institute, (2019),Discovering the futureof the London Datastore
30.Open Data Institute, (2017),How can open data portalsbecome sustainable?
31.Open Data Institute, (2021),Le Guin’s data identities
32.Open Data Institute, (2020),Mapping the wide worldof data sharing
33.Open Data Institute, (2016),Open data in government:how to bring about change
34.Open Data Institute, (2021),Technologies used bydata stewards – an initial study
35.Open Data Institute, (2016),We need to learn howto search the web of data
36.Open Data Institute, (2021),What are data institutionsand why are they important?
37.Open Data Institute, (2021),What is data infrastructure?
38.Open Data Institute, (2016),What is open data?
39of40

39.Open Data Institute, ODI Leeds, (2021),ODI Leeds – building collaborative communities
40.Open Data Institute, Thacker, M., (2016),Puttingforgotten communities back on the
map with open data
41.Open Data Policy Lab City Incubator, (2021),ThirdWave of Open Data
42.Open Future, (2021),The paradox of open
43.Organising Engagement, [refs Arnstein, S.], (2021),Ladder of Citizen Participation
44.Palgrave Macmillan, Anastasiu, I., Foth, M., Schroeter, R., Rittenbruch, M., (2020),From
Repositories to Switchboards: Local Governments as Open Data Facilitators
45.Paris21, Open Data Watch, (2021),Data Disseminationin the Digital Age (report)
46.Publications Office of the European Data Portal, Berends, J., Carrara, W. Engbers, W.,
Vollers, H., (2017),Re-using Open Data - report
47.Publications Office of the European Data Portal, Sasse, T., Smith, A., Broad, E., (2020),
Recommendations for open data portals : from setup to sustainability
48.Publications Office of the European Data Portal, Simperl, E., Walker, J., (2020),
Analytical Report 8: The Future of Open Data Portals
49.Schrack A., (2021),Guide to Creating, Using, andMaintaining Open Data Portals
50.Telematics and Informatics Volume 61, Lnenicka M., Nikiforova A., (2021),
Transparency-by-design: What is the role of open data portals?
51.The White House, (2009),Transparency and Open Government
52.Traverse, (2021),Inclusive Practice
53.Wikipedia, (2021),Design principles for Common PoolResource (CPR) institution
54.Wikipedia, (2021),Service design sprint
55.Wikipedia, (2021),Wilson's model of information (seeking)behavior
40of40