



Contents
Contents1
About2
Introduction3
Summary of final quantified benefits5
Marine Environmental Data and Information Network6
About6
Impact7
Costs9
An array of use cases9
Farmbench10
About10
Impact11
Costs12
Sustaining the tool12
360Giving13
About13
Impact14
Costs15
Expanding standards15
Clinical Practice Research Datalink16
About16
Impact17
Costs18
Supporting public health research in the UK19
OpenActive20
About20
Impact21
Costs23
Future prospects23
Bottom-up
data institutions24
Synthesis and reflections26
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions1

About
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and
published in March 2022. Its lead authors are Aditya Singh and Jack Hardinges. To
share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact the Data Institutions project
lead, Jack Hardinges, atdatainstitutions@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions2

Introduction
At the Open Data Institute (ODI), we’re interested in data institutions –
organisations that steward data on behalf of others, often towards public,
educational or charitable aims.We think data institutionshave a vital role to play
1
in ensuring that data is used to create new technologies, products and services,
as well as limiting the harm that misuses of data can cause people and
communities.
We’ve done a lot of work on the different ways data institutions can steward data
responsibly, such as by facilitating safe access to sensitive dataand empowering
2
people to play a more active role in deciding how data is used. This study is part
3
of our ongoing effort to increase awareness and understanding of data institutions
among policymakers, funders and others. The objective is to support them in
making interventions that create an enabling environment for data institutions to
thrive.
This study aims to improve understanding of data institutions by quantifying the
impact they may have on the ecosystems within which they operate. There is
already a body of evidence for the impact of open data and open standards; some
of which has also been conducted by the ODI. While these provide valuable
insight into the impact and benefits of data flows, and how they may be
measured, there is limited evidence for the impact of data institutions and the
stewardship they perform.
Data institutions vary in size, domain and maturity. We’ve previously identified the
following roles they may perform:
4
●
Facilitating safe access – protecting sensitive data and facilitating safe
access under restricted conditions.
●
Empowering people – empowering people to take a more active role in
stewarding data about themselves and their communities.
●
Independent gatekeeping – acting as a gatekeeper for data held by
other organisations.
●
Publishing open data – creating open datasets that anyone can access,
use and share to further a particular mission or cause.
●
Developing infrastructure – developing and maintaining identifiers,
standards and other infrastructure for a sector, or field, such as
open standards.
●
Generating insights – combining or linking data from multiple sources
and generating insights and other services back to those that have
contributed data.
4
Open Data Institute (2021),What are data institutionsand why are they important?
3
Open Data Institute (2021),Could ‘bottom-up datatrusts’ help to tackle the climate crisis?
2
Open Data Institute (2021),How do data institutionsfacilitate safe access to sensitive data?
1
Open Data Institute (2021),What are data institutionsand why are they important?
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions3

Considering this diversity, this study focuses on illustrative case studies of five
UK-based data institutions, corresponding with the different stewardship roles:
5
●
Marine Environmental Data and Information Network (MEDIN) (Facilitating
safe access & Developing infrastructure) – a web portal which aggregates
UK marine data, providing a centralised access point for users.
●
Farmbench (Independent gatekeeping & Generating insights) – an online
benchmarking tool which allows farmers to compare their performance to
other farmers across the UK.
●
360Giving (Publishing open data & Developing infrastructure) – a charity
which provides an open search platform for charitable grants data.
●
Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) (Facilitating safe access &
Independent gatekeeping) – a platform which collects anonymised patient
data from UK GPs, and links this data to a range of other sources to
provide a UK representative health dataset.
●
OpenActive (Developing infrastructure) – a sector-wide initiative providing
a set of open data standards, and support with using and adopting these
standards, to facilitate the sharing of sports activity data.
These case studies demonstrate the ways in which different types of data
institutions create value within their ecosystems. Our aim is for the findings to
serve as evidence for policymakers when designing interventions – such as in the
case of UK Government’s work on data intermediaries and the EU’s interest in
data altruism organisations – and for data institutions themselves to be able to
point to this evidence base in making the case for their work. We also hope that
this study indicates how the value generated by these institutions, and
approaches to documenting it, may be extrapolated to other data institutions.
We commissioned London Economics to support us with this research. Their
approach for each case study involved three steps:
6
●
Data ecosystem mapping– Using ODI’s data ecosystemmapping
methodology and creating a visual representation of the stakeholders in
the ecosystem (for example, data institution, data provider, end user) and
the value chains connecting these stakeholders (for example, data,
financial benefit, reputation gain).
●
Stakeholder consultations– Conducting semi-structuredinterviews with
multiple stakeholders in each ecosystem, to substantiate the ecosystem
map’s existing value chains and expand with additional chains.
●
Quantification– Developing a framework to quantifythe benefits from
each data institution. This included producing estimates that could be
obtained given the project’s scale, timeframe and data availability, while
also scoping how further estimates could be obtained in future work.
6
SeeAnnexfor a detailed description of the methodology.
5
The initial aim was to study six data institutions corresponding with each role. However, as we
describe on page [xx], there remain unique challenges with identifying and measuring the impact of
bottom-up data institutions.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions4

In the following section, there is a table summarising the quantified benefits from
the data institutions we studied. Subsequent sections set out our findings from the
individual case studies, including data ecosystem maps, a description of each
data institution and their data stewardship role, and estimates of the value they
generate for their stakeholders. The final section summarises and reflects on the
findings across the case studies.
Summary of final quantified benefits
MEDINFarmbench360GivingCPRDOpenActive
Time savings from
making data more
findable and
accessible£1.84
million per year
Efficiency gains from
reduced labour
costs
£212,577 per year
Duplication of
funding avoided
£10.4 billion
Number of
academic
papers/publications
supported by CPRD
2,900
Additional bookings
enabled
529,576 per month
Cost savings from
making data
reusable
£1.32 million per
year
Efficiency gains from
reduced machinery
costs
£283,437 per year
Time savings for
funders and grant
recipients
£1.5 million
Compensation for
GPs recruiting
patients into clinical
trials enabled by
CPRD£50,000 per
year
Additional revenue
enabled in the
ecosystem£15.6
million per month
Cost savings from
improved data
management and
storage£2.64
million per year
Efficiency gains from
reduced expenditure
on inputs (for
example, fertilisers,
pesticides)£2.6
million per year
Cost savings for
pharmaceutical
companies on
phase 2 and 3
clinical trials
£5 million
Time savings for
individuals to find
activities£4.7
million per month
Additional datasets
shared497
Number of
academic
papers/publications
supported by
Farmbench4 to 5
per year
Cost savings for
pharmaceutical
companies on
phase 4
(“pragmatic”)
clinical trials
£800 million
Time savings for
activity providers on
promotional
activities
£267,200 per
month
Societal benefits of
increased exercise:
Avoided death
79 per month
Productivity loss
£5.2 million per
month
Healthcare costs
£4.1 million per
month
Source: London Economics
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions5

Marine Environmental
Data and Information
Network
Improving access to UK marine data
About
The Marine Environmental Data and Information Network (MEDIN) was established
in 2008 to make the collation, analysis and access to marine data easier and
cheaper.
Marine data is crucial for many scientific disciplines, as well as for a variety of
commercial activities such as port and fisheries management, environmental
planning, marine conservation and weather forecasting. Marine data is also being
increasingly used in public policy and planning. Marine data collection, however, is
expensive due to the complex nature of the marine environment and the fact that
marine data is always unique relative to time and geographical position.Another
7
challenge is that data is often held in silos, which makes it difficult for
organisations and researchers to find and access the various types of datasets
they may need.
8
MEDIN is anopen partnership representing governmentdepartments,
research institutions and private companies.Itspurpose is to promote the
9
sharing and reuse of marine data, as well as to improve access to marine data
through:
●
Data Archive Centres (DACs)
●
a web portal
●
a metadata standard to provide information about datasets
●
workshops to improve the uptake, knowledge and use of MEDIN data
guidelines and metadata standards.
10
The MEDIN DACs have committed to making datasets openly available wherever
possible and to removing barriers to data access such as having to register or pay
for the services provided.
11
11
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021),Value chains in public marine
data: A UK case study. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers 2021/11
10
MEDIN (n.d.),About MEDIN
9
Eftec and ABPmer (2019),MEDIN Cost Benefit Analysis2019
8
MEDIN (2010),Managing UK marine data. Marine ScientistNo.32
7
Eftec and ABPmer (2019),MEDIN Cost Benefit Analysis2019
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions6

Figure 1:MEDIN data ecosystem map
Source: London Economics analysis
Impact
MEDIN conducted a cost–benefit analysis in 2019 with eftec, an environmental
economics consultancy, and ABPmer, a group of marine consultants. Our
research builds on their work.
Data end users save a considerable amount of time searching for marine
datasets because of the availability and accessibility of data through the
MEDIN data portal. These time savings may relate to academic and
commercial research, marine licence applications and environmental impact
assessments. It is estimated that the total value of the time saved each year
due to MEDIN is£1.84 million.
12
By being able to find and access secondary data through the MEDIN portal,
organisations may be spared having to collect primary data themselves and avoid
duplicating the work that other organisations have already done.
MEDIN provides guidelines on how data must be structured, as well as
metadata which describes relevant information about each dataset.
Organisations are therefore able to reuse datasets that have been uploaded
by others. This saves approximately£1.32 millionper yearon primary
research efforts.
13
13
Ibid
12
Eftec and ABPmer (2019),MEDIN Cost Benefit Analysis2019.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions7

This figure is likely tounderestimate the true savingsrelated to research
duplicationas it is a time cost measure and thereforedoes not include the cost of
specialised equipment that is generally required to collect marine data.
By following the guidelines on how to format data and sharing it with DACs to
store,organisations save time and resources whenmanaging their data.
Organisations can be sure that the data they collect will be stored safely,
and that it is formatted in a usable way when they need to access it again.
This saves organisations approximately£2.64 millionper yearon
management and storage costs.
14
There are also reputational benefits for data suppliers when they provide data to
MEDIN, as it is seen as the socially responsible thing to do.
Researchersaccount for the largest proportion ofMEDIN data users and make
up half of all data downloads.This includes peopleworking in academia, as well
15
as in research councils. Marine data underpins many scientific research studies
and is often required to place research within geographic and temporal contexts.
16
Assuming that access to the MEDIN portal enables academics to publish a
paper a year, anadditional 700 research papersarepublished as a result
of the MEDIN portal.
Government departments and agenciesrely on MEDINdata to monitor
reporting and status assessment of the seas, inform marine planning and assist in
human activity (such as fishing or navigation), and in the creation of
oceanographic models for forecasting by the Navy and the Met office.Just under
17
20% of MEDIN data downloads come from the government departments and
maritime authorities.
18
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and conservation groupsare also
interested in marine data, both as a general interest and to allow stakeholders to
participate in marine planning and management processes.Approximately 8% of
19
MEDIN users are NGOs and conservation groups that access data through the
MEDIN portal.
19
MEDIN (n.d.),About MEDIN
18
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021),Value chains in public marine
data: A UK case study
17
Ibid
16
MEDIN (n.d.),About MEDIN
15
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021),Value chains in public marine
data: A UK case study
14
Ibid
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions8

Assuming that each of these users represents one project:
●
around250 government projectsare enabled throughMEDIN each year
●
around84 conservation projectsare enabled throughMEDIN each year.
Costs
Uploading data and metadata to DACs involves spending time becoming familiar
with the MEDIN standards and preparing data, as well as ensuring that each
dataset and the related metadata are MEDIN-compliant prior to upload. The cost
that data suppliers incur uploading data is estimated to be approximately
£180,000 per year.The cost of running MEDIN, includingemployment of the
20
core team, associated overheads, and external contracts related to maintenance
and operation of the MEDIN network, are estimated to be£720,000 per year.
21
An array of use cases
MEDIN demonstrates the wide ecosystem of impact that mature data institutions
can have.Commercial organisationsmake up 21% ofMEDIN users.Marine
22
data is a key input for companies at many stages of projects, including when
assessing an optimal site or route, carrying out environmental impact
assessments, satisfying licensing requirements, and informing engineering
designs on operational conditions.Benefits for commercialparties include the
23
potential to commercialise public marine data into highly complex and customised
information products, as well as having access to data which can inform planning
and operations.These benefits, though significant,would be challenging to
24
quantify in the present study.
There is also demand for marine data from thegeneralpublic, although this is the
smallest group of MEDIN users (5%). This demand can be due to both a general
interest in the seas and a desire to use the coastline safely for recreational and
tourism purposes.
25
Theenvironmentbenefits through evidence-based policyactions from the
government, which regulate how commercial organisations use the sea and
coastline, as well as from evidence-based conservation efforts by NGOs and
conservation groups.
25
Ibid
24
Ibid
23
MEDIN (n.d.),About MEDIN
22
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021),Value chains in public marine
data: A UK case study
21
Ibid
20
Eftec and ABPmer (2019),MEDIN Cost Benefit Analysis2019
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions9

Farmbench
Enabling valuable industry insights by combining
performance data across the UK farming industry
About
Farmbench is an online benchmarking tool operated by theAgriculture and
Horticulture Development Board (AHDB), which representsfarmers, growers
and others in the supply chain.
In exchange for inputting their own farming data into Farmbench, farmers can
accesslive benchmarking reports to compare theirfarm’s performance to
similar businesses in the UK, which can help themimprove their farming
decisions.
Farmbench generates the benchmarking data by aggregating and anonymising the
data entered by each individual farmer. The data entered by farmers
predominantly includesfinancial data(variable andfixed costs) andphysical
data(for example, livestock) about their farmingenterprise.Farmersare the bulk
of Farmbench users. There are over 2,000 registered users, of which1,200
farmers actively contribute their data to the tool.
26
The AHDB created Farmbench in around 2017 as a cross-sector tool to replace
the sector-specific tools it had previously operated, that is, benchmarking tools
that each specialise in one type of farming (for example, dairy, beef and sheep,
combined crops). Covering multiple enterprises createsefficiency gainsas
non-specialist farmers with multiple enterprises only have to use one
benchmarking tool. This hasincreased uptake of benchmarkingamong farmers.
Before Farmbench, only an average of 2% of users of each sector-specific
benchmarking tool operated by the AHDB were non-specialist farmers. Now,
about 40% of Farmbench users are non-specialist farmers.
26
There has been some fluctuation in the number of farmers contributing to the tool over the years. For
the Autumn 2020 cycle, the number of participating farmers was relatively lower than the previous
year as a significant number of farmers were unwilling to use Farmbench because the entire process
had to be conducted online during the pandemic.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions10

Figure 2:Farmbench data ecosystem map
Source: London Economics analysis
Impact
Farmbench provides farmers with benchmarking data, industry insights and
knowledge-sharing opportunities that can help them make better farming
decisions that lead to cost savings or efficiency gains for their farming enterprise.
This includes savings on inputs such as fertilisers, seeds and herbicides, as well
as savings on machinery and labour costs.
An evaluation study of Farmbench (2017 to 2020) estimated annual savings
per individual farmer from on-farm changes due to Farmbench to be about
£6,600.The study assumes that 20% of the 2,677 registeredFarmbench
27
users have made on-farm changes due to Farmbench and estimates the total
annual efficiency gains across all farmers to be about£3.5 million.
Improved farming performance and cost reduction typically lead to more
sustainable farming and improved environmental impacts that benefit both
farmers and the wider society. These environmental benefits can include:
28
●
reduced greenhouse gas emissions
●
improved soil condition (and carbon storage) by adding matter and
reducing pesticide usage
●
reduced water usage
●
improved water quality by protecting watercourses from sediment and
pesticides in run-off
●
improved landscape diversity and increased pollination.
28
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs (2021),Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot:
environmental outcomes and benefits
27
Teevan, P (2021), Final Evaluation Report: Farmbench Period 2017-2020
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions11

In addition to farmers, the AHDB and the Farmbench team itself,third-party
researchersand farm business consultancies also useFarmbench data.
Farmbench receives four to five data requests from external researchers a year.
Farmbench facilitates or enables this research by providing access to aggregated
industry data. Without Farmbench, it would be possible (but costly) to consolidate
cross-sector mixed farm data at a local level, but it would probably not be feasible
to obtain the data at a national level. However, there is limited evidence available
to quantify the value of the research enabled by Farmbench data at this stage.
Costs
Themain costs within the Farmbench ecosystem arethose associated with
developing, maintaining and operating Farmbench, includingproviding user
support to farmers. These costs amount to about£1.2million a year, which
mainly includes the wages of the AHDB employees operating Farmbench.
The time and effort that farmers spend entering data into Farmbench, as well as
understanding the live benchmarking reports, should also be accounted for.
However, these are likely to be small relative to the efficiency gains for farmers
from using the benchmarking information.
Sustaining the tool
The sustainability of Farmbench depends on positive feedback and appreciation
from the farmers. AHDB supports farmers in using the tool through a team of
people dotted around the UK who interact directly with farmers and help them
input their data. Farmbench data and benchmarking reports are also used to
supportdiscussion groups and workshops between farmers,where knowledge
and best practice on how to improve farming performance are shared.
In turn, the AHDB benefits from an improved reputation and positive feedback
within the industry as farmers make efficiency gains and value using Farmbench.
Given that the AHDB is entirely funded through farmers’ levy, a good reputation is
key to ensuring its continuity and success.
Farmbench is currently working with other countries (for example, Australia and
New Zealand) on similar initiatives, to further expand the geographical coverage of
their benchmarking data.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions12

360Giving
Creating open grants data that anyone can access,
use and share.
About
360Giving is a charity that aims to improve grant making in the UK. 360Giving
operates anopen databasecalled GrantNav, which consistsof UK grants data
such as the amount, award date, recipient and corresponding grant maker’s
information.
Most of the data is provided by the grant makers. 360Giving also developsopen
data standardsfor grant makers to publish their dataon GrantNav, and it
enriches the submitted grants data with information from other sources, such as
company data from Companies House.
The 360Giving database currently covers217 grantmakers in the UKand over
280,000 grants worth£110 billion. The data can beaccessed and downloaded by
anyone from the 360Giving website. 360Giving also helps both grant makers and
recipients understand how to make full use of the open database and related
tools.
Figure 3:360Giving data ecosystem map
Source: London Economics analysis
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions13

Impact
Grant makers can use the 360Giving data to improve their grant-making decisions,
including diversifying their funding to new and/or underfunded charities,
identifying new potential grant recipients and coordinating with other grant makers
to distribute grant money. The data was particularly useful during theCovid-19
pandemicand allowed grant makers todistribute emergencygrants as evenly
as possible.
Grant makerscan make efficiency gains by identifyingand leveraging previous
due diligence and compliance checks conducted by other funders on potential
grant recipients, as itreduces duplication of effortsand frees up resources.
The information on 360Giving also provides grant makers with an idea of where
they sit within the ecosystem of grant funding.
Assuming10 hours of time aresaved by grant makersin funding decision
making; anda minimum hourly wage rate equal to theUK national living
wage of £8.91, there arecost savings of £89.10 perfunder and about
£19,000 for all 217 fundersparticipating in the 360Givingdatabase.
Improved funding decisions by grant makers can potentially help them avoid
redundant funding and instead allocate funds where they are most needed and
valuable, improving overall UK grant-making outcomes in the long term.
Assuming that a share of grants worth 10% of the total grant value covered
by 360Giving avoids being funded in duplication as a result of grant makers
using the database to make more informed funding decisions, the estimated
value of this reduction induplication of fundingis over £10 billion. These
funds are then likely to be redirected to organisations that haven’t
previously received funding. This figure also indicates how the measure of
value from stewardship may be closely linked to the value and nature of the
data stewarded (in this instance, high-value philanthropic grants).
Grant recipients and charitiesuse the 360Giving datatoimprove their
grant-funding decisionsby looking at informationon what makes a successful
applicant, beyond the minimum requirements that are typically published by the
funder on the grant application. This can help charities free up resources and
make efficiency gains by strategically prioritising grant applications.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions14

Assuming 10% of grant recipients relied on the 360Giving database, with
10 hours of time saved in grant applications; and assuming a minimum
hourly wage rate equal to the UK national living wage of £8.91, there is an
estimated cost saving of £89.10 per grant recipient and close to £1.5
million for the estimated 16,832 grant recipientsthat used the
360Giving database.
Government and researchersuse the 360Giving datafor their own research and
planning purposes. For example, some government departments that are grant
makers do not have access to a structured grant database internally, and use the
360Giving database instead. 360Giving benefits the government and researchers
by allowing them to minimise the costs associated with accessing UK grants data
as part of their work.
Costs
Themain costs are those related to developing, maintainingand operating
360Giving. These include the wages of the 360Givingteam, which amounts to
about£250,000 to £300,000 a year. Additionally, thetechnical maintenance and
development of the tools and database, which is outsourced, costs about
£150,000 a year.
Expanding standards
While there have been many studies on the impact of open data, 360Giving
demonstrates how even relatively specialised datasets can engage a wide network
of stakeholders, and generate impact. Since the inception of the 360Giving grants
database, sharing funding data hasincreasingly becomea standardamong
grant makers. Only very few of the largest funders in the UK still do not publish
their funding data. In part because of the Covid-19 pandemic,some grant
makers have created new capacity within their organisations for uploading
dataas fast and as regularly as possible.
360Giving is currently working on expanding the set of fields within the database
to include additional details on the grant maker and recipient, and a metadata
repository. It is also working on a new equity standard, given strong appetite from
grant makers to include information on the ethnic diversity of grant recipients’
leadership teams, as improving diversity is a priority for grant makers.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions15

Clinical Practice
Research Datalink
Providing access to anonymised UK population
health data to approved organisations and studies
About
Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) is a not-for-profit research service that
supports public health and clinical studies. It collectsanonymised patient data
from a network of over 2,000 GP practices across the UK, which can be linked
to a range of other health-related data to provide a longitudinal, representative UK
population health dataset. CPRD data is used by academia, industry and
government organisations worldwide to investigate drug safety, the effectiveness
of health policies, healthcare delivery and disease risk factors.
Anonymised patient data is shared with the CPRD by GPs across the country, with
one in five primary care practices uploading their patient data. CPRD data
currently encompasses over 60 million patients, including 16 million currently
registered patients of which a medical history from the last 20 years exists for a
quarter of them. This data is then linked to secondary care and other health
datasets, as well as to area-based datasets by the CPRD. Before patient data
reaches the CPRD, it isautomatically pseudonymised,pushed to NHS Digital,
where it is linked to NHS secondary care data, and then passed from NHS Digital
to CPRDin anonymised form.
CPRD provides access to UK patient datasets that are quality-assured,
longitudinal, representative and collected in real time. Organisations from the
private and public sectors can access CPRD data provided they receive approval
through the CPRD's Research Data Governance Process.
CPRD also offers services such as the CPRD SPRINT, for commercial and
non-commercial organisations to recruit patients for clinical trials. CPRD SPRINT
(SPeedy Recruitment INto Trials) supports organisations that are rapidly recruiting
patients living with chronic conditions into phase 2 and 3 trials. This service uses
CPRD data to identify potentially eligible patients in the community. Similarly,
CPRD can help organisations to run post-market clinical trials (also known as
“pragmatic trials”), in which data is used to understand how medications work in
the real world.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions16

Figure 4:CPRD data ecosystem map
Source: London Economics analysis
Impact
CPRD data has been used in2,900 peer-reviewed publications,with
approximately 60% of these publications (1,740) being from the last five years.
Half of CPRD users are commercial and all of the top 20 largest pharmaceutical
companies are CPRD users. CPRD enables access to anonymised patient-level
primary care and linked data, which supports a wide range of commercial
applications. End users can also get access to expert advice on data, validation
and study design from the CPRD.
CPRD SPRINT services are considerably less expensive and time-consuming than
traditional methods of patient recruitment. Using CPRD SPRINT services to recruit
individuals reduces the cost by half, which means that companies could save
around£250,000on a clinical trial involving 100patients.
29
Assuming that CPRD will run 10 SPRINT services for 10 clients per year (10
trials), we estimate that this would result in acostsavings of at least £5
millionfor the pharmaceutical industry per year.
29
In practice, the cost per patient varies significantly. We have assumed an average cost of £5,000 per
patient, based on information from stakeholder consultations.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions17

In addition, depending on the size of the trial, companies could complete their trial
six months faster if they opt for the SPRINT service. This time saving benefit may be
incalculably large in cases where firms are competing to get a drug to market first.
CPRD “pragmatic trial” services are also considerably less expensive than
traditional methods. CPRD can run a 3,000-person pragmatic trial for £10–20
million for a commercial organisation, which would cost around £100 million to run
without CPRD; anestimated saving of between 80 and90%.
In the future, if CPRD has the capacity to provide recruitment services for
10 pragmatic trials annually, this would result in a total cost saving of£800
millionfor the pharmaceutical industry.
GPs can earn additional income for their practices through clinical trials and
surveys. These payments depend on the type of trials being conducted and the
value would be agreed upon between the GPs and the company conducting the
trial – the value of these payments is confidential. Based on a review of the
literature, we assume that the minimum payment to GPs for recruiting patients into
a trial is £50 per patient.
30
If 10 trials consisting of 100 patients each were conducted each year
through CPRD, the total benefit to UK-based GPs would amount to at least
£50,000 per year.
GPs also receive regular practice-level prescribing and patient safety quality
improvement (QI) reports from CPRD.
Costs
CPRD is a not-for-profit organisation that aims to aid public health research and
recoup the costs of doing so through services to the private sector. Because of
this, it is assumed that the total revenue earned by CPRD is approximately equal
to its total operating costs. Total annual revenue for CPRD is estimated to be just
over£10 million, based on the number of multi-studylicence agreements sold
and the proportion of revenue which comes from these agreements.A multiple
31
study licence agreement for commercial organisations costs£330,000 per year. A
multiple study licence agreement for non-commercial organisations costs£75,000
per year.
31
These data points were provided to us through stakeholder consultations.
30
Raftery, Jet al (2008), Payment to healthcare professionals for patient recruitment to trials: systematic
review and qualitative study. Health Technology Assess; 12(10)
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions18

Supporting public health research in the UK
CPRD demonstrates how safe data access controls can support access to
uniquely valuable datasets, which would otherwise be unavailable to stakeholders.
Major pharmaceutical trials are increasingly being conducted in the UK because
CPRD lowers the cost of recruiting to trials and provides high-quality data. This
benefits patients as participating in trials means they can get access to treatments
before they are available on the market. Research on Covid-19 heavily relied on
CPRD datasets and services.
CPRD linked datasets provide a fuller picture to public health institutions, enabling
them to make informed improvements in patient safety and the delivery of care.
CPRD lowers the cost of collecting data and therefore the cost of conducting
medical research. This may increase the already substantial returns to medical
research.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions19

OpenActive
Developing open data standards to publish
and use data about activities
About
OpenActive is a community-led initiative for the sport and activity sector. OpenActive
has developedopen standards for dataabout where,when and what activities are
taking place, to make it easier for people to find and book activities online.
32
OpenActive brings together organisations from across the sports and physical
activity sector to publish and use open data, and has more than 120 member
organisations in the UK that are helping to embed OpenActive standards into their
platforms.Although OpenActive provides some infrastructure,its main role is to
33
provide data standards and encourage data publication.
The standards developed by OpenActive are applied by system providers, data
aggregators and data users so that the information about activity opportunities
follows the same format and can be easily integrated into various services and
tools such as OpenSessions (a platform funded by Sports England that allows
members to promote activity sessions to wider audiences) or Playfinder (an online
platform to book activities and sports facilities). Activity providers may be
individuals, clubs, grassroots organisationssuchas charities, or larger
institutions such as schools or gyms.
Innovators can use this open data to build products and services that help people
find the information they need to get active. It improves the customer experience,
helps activity providers reach new audiences, and helps more people get active.
33
OpenActive (n.d.),Our members
32
OpenActive (n.d.),OpenActive
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions20

Figure 5:OpenActive data ecosystem map
Source: London Economics analysis
Impact
Activity providers using OpenActive standards are able to share and promote
information about their activities more effectively with system providers and data
users, and therefore customers are more likely to find, book and participate in
activities.
It is estimated that OpenActive standards have led to anadditional
325,893 opportunitiespublished per month, resultinginalmost 530,000
additional bookings.
OpenActive generates just over £15.5 million per month through additional
activity bookings. Based on information gathered through stakeholder
interviews, between 10% and 15% of this revenue is claimed by the
booking system as commission, while the rest accrues to the activity
providers.Activity providers therefore generate anadditional £13.6
million in revenue, and booking systems £1.9 million, per month.
Customers spend less time trying to find activities they want to participate in, and
are more likely to find activities in their price range, in convenient locations, and
that fit into their schedules. Information about the amount of time saved through
data sharing is not currently documented, and it could be that the only reliable
way of recording this would be through a representative survey of consumers and
activity providers.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions21

For each of the additional 530,000 bookings, assuming that consumers save
an average of one hour searching time per activity booked, and a UK national
living wage of £8.91 per hour, we estimatethe totalvalue of time saved by
individuals to be £4.7 million per month.
Activity providers that share their information with system providers and/or data
users according to the OpenActive standards save time on marketing and
promotion of their activities. For example, grassroots activity providers can upload
information to OpenSessions, which can be accessed and shared by booking
systems or activity finders. Without OpenActive standards to enable this, these
activity providers would have to promote their classes themselves, either through
social media or by leafleting.
Based on the conservative assumption that activity providers save £10 per
month on promotion and marketing, we estimate that open data publication
supported by OpenActive saves them£300,000 per monthon trying to
reach their audiences.
Increasing access to data leads to an increase in the number of hours of physical
activity completed by people in the UK: around half of those participating in
opportunities published through OpenActive would not have been able to do so
had it not been for the open data standard.
34
Participating in physical activity promotes a healthier lifestyle, as well as having a
positive impact on social connectedness. There are also wider societal benefits
such as a reduction in premature deaths due to inactivity, fewer losses to the
economy and lower healthcare costs that are borne by the state.
It is estimated that the increase in the number of hours spent exercising that
open data enables can lead to the avoidance of almost 79 premature deaths
per month, and a reduction of£4.1 millionin healthcarecosts.
34
Frontier Economics (2019), Open standards for data: Evaluation the economic and social returns
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions22

Costs
OpenActive hasoperating costs of around £200,000per year, which is used to
pay for the initiatives' staff costs. A further£70,000is needed each year for
stimulus funding, such as running pilot programmesand raising awareness about
the open data standards. Themaintenance and operationalcosts of running
OpenSessions(a systems provider working with OpenActivedata) amount to
£15,000 per year now that the platform has been developed.
Future prospects
At present, only activities relating directly to a sport or physical activity are
covered under the data standards. However, stakeholders mentioned that
OpenActive could broaden this to include other types of activities in the future,
such as social prescribing. Social prescribing is a holistic approach to people’s
health and wellbeing in which people with long-term conditions can be linked to
community groups and services for practical and emotional support.For
35
example, a local agency may prescribe activities such as gardening or a cooking
class for an individual suffering from depression or loneliness. These types of
activities are often prescribed alongside physical activities, and could therefore be
a potential area of expansion for OpenActive.
35
NHS (n.d.),Social prescribing
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions23

Bottom-up
data institutions
Empowering people to take a more active role in stewarding data
about themselves and their communities
In our work exploring data institutions, we’ve come across a number that have the
objective of enabling individuals – typically those from whom data has been
generated, or to whom the data relates – to play a more active role in data
stewardship.
We describe these as ‘bottom-up’ data institutions.Some enable people to
36
donate data about themselves to support further health research; some aim to
harness data to support specific groups, such as gig economy workers. Many of
them focus on addressing power asymmetries, and enabling increased
participation from individuals and communities in decisions related to their data
than they would otherwise have had. For example:
●
Variant Bio works with historically marginalised populations to facilitate
people-driven therapeutics. Communities are engaged prior to the
beginning of research projects; their data is then collected and used within
a framework that centres community concerns.
●
Driver’s Seat is an independent, driver-owned cooperative where
members’ data is used to derive insights that help them optimise their
earnings and performance.
●
Swash enables users to control what data is collected about their
browsing habits, as well as to aggregate and sell access to this data to
generate financial return.
●
OpenHumans empowers individuals and communities to explore and
share their personal data for the purposes of education, health and
research.
●
MIDATA enables users to contribute to medical research and clinical
studies by granting selective access to their personal data.
●
Gyeonggi Data Dividend ensures that any financial profits generated by
selling access to data about transactions using the local currency are
returned to citizens in the form of a dividend.
Concepts such as ‘data cooperatives’, ‘data trusts’, ‘data unions’ and ‘personal
data stores’ fall within this ‘bottom-up’ category, and there has recently been a lot
of interest, exploration and experimentation in this area, as evidenced by work
from the Aapti Institute, the Data Trusts Initiative, the Ada Lovelace Institute, the
Mozilla Data Futures Lab, and others.
36
  Open Data Institute (2021),Could ‘bottom-up datatrusts’ help to tackle the climate crisis?
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions24

For the purposes of this study, however, we were unable to find a suitable case
study candidate. While there are initiatives based in the UK that align with the
objective of bottom-up empowerment, it was difficult to determine whether they
had attained sufficient institutional maturity and sustainability to demonstrate
impact.
This is a nascent field, rife with experimentation, and bottom-up data institutions
are likely to have a large impact in the future. We’re currently undertaking research
to explore the different interventions available to the UK government and other
policymakers to support and enable bottom-up data institutions. Our experience
with this study will enrich our insights on the state of such institutions and the
nature of support they may need.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions25

Synthesis and
reflections
Data institutions come in many shapes and sizes, and operate in very different
domains. This diversity means it is difficult to generate robust macroeconomic
estimates of their impact. Our case study approach helped us map how an
illustrative set of data institutions might create different forms of value within their
different ecosystems. Some of the things we learnt along the way were:
1.It is difficult to collect the data necessary to generate robust
estimates of the impact of data institutions. Datainstitutions are at
different stages of institutional maturity. For more established institutions,
the quantification process was aided by the greater availability of data
about them and how they interact with their stakeholders. However, in
general, data on their impact was challenging to obtain. This challenge is
most acute with bottom-up data institutions, arguably the most
experimental approach to data stewardship, where we could not identify
an appropriate case study to use to assess their impact. On the other
hand, data on the costs associated with stewardship roles was relatively
easier to obtain, and demonstrated that data institutions generate impact
for a wide range of stakeholders at comparatively limited cost.
2.Despite their variety, there are some similarities in the nature of the
impacts that data institutions have. While estimatesfrom different data
institutions cannot be directly compared, our research brought to the fore
important similarities in how data institutions create value. Some of the
data institutions we studied enabled access to data for research (MEDIN,
Farmbench, CPRD, 360Giving), saving time and resources by making data
more findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable. Some data
institutions also balance the need to broaden access to data with
restricting it in ways that generate commercial revenue to sustain their
activities (for instance, CPRD provides data access to the largest
pharmaceutical companies which helps to sustain access for
non-commercial users; 21% of MEDIN’s users are commercial users,
using marine data for use cases such as informing shipping routes and
developing information products).
3.It is easy to undercount the broad, societal impacts of data
institutions. Reducing the resource intensity of farming(FarmBench) and
the use of marine data in conservation projects (MEDIN) have clear
environmental benefits. Improving access to clinical data for research
(CPRD) and driving increased physical activity (OpenActive) have benefits
for individual wellbeing and public health. Enabling more effective grant
making (360Giving) supports a range of philanthropic outcomes. However,
these benefits are disparate and downstream, which makes them difficult
to quantify.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions26

4.Data institutions adapt and adjust their activities, which gives rise to
evolving types of impact. 360Giving is in the processof expanding to
allow a more detailed set of data categories about grant making to be
published; Farmbench is expanding its coverage to similar initiatives
outside the UK; OpenActive is exploring expanding its work on data
standards for social prescribing; and CPRD datasets have supported
research into Covid-19.
5.An underappreciated function of data institutions is that they build
capacityamong stakeholders in their ecosystems. Somedata
institutions do this consciously to increase participation and uptake:
Farmbench supports farmers in inputting data into the tool, and holds
workshops to share insights from its analysis; CPRD provides access to
expert advice on data validation and study design; 360Giving provides
support and information to users on using their tools; and MEDIN
conducts workshops to build knowledge and capacity on their tools and
metadata standards.
Given the limited scope of this project, we’re aware that we will not have captured
all of the impacts of data institutions, and we have tried to be clear where we’ve
made assumptions to generate estimates. We’ve also highlighted the types of
impacts and potential methods that would aid such efforts and future work in this
area.
37
Building on this study, avenues for future work could entail:
●
employing additional data collection methods such as user surveys to
generate richer and more accurate assessments of downstream impacts
●
exploring ways to meaningfully compare quantified impacts across data
institutions or begin to extrapolate to economy-wide estimates
●
assessing the impact of bottom-up data institutions outside the UK that
may have reached sufficient maturity, especially given the policy interest in
the field.
Data institutions are characterised by their diversity. With this study, we’ve begun
to describe and measure the ways in which they may typically engage
stakeholders and create impact. We hope our findings will inform policy makers,
funders and data institutions themselves as they advocate for continued support
in their role as key enablers of trustworthy data stewardship.
37
See Annex.
Open Data Institute | March 2022 | Research reportMeasuring the impact of data institutions27