



Contents
Contents
Why should we map data ecosystems?
Example ecosystem map
Methodology
Defining the goal of mapping the data ecosystem
Mapping your data ecosystem
Writing up and improving your map
Next steps
Additional tips for facilitators of data ecosystem mapping
Running a workshop
Before the workshop
During the workshop
Running interviews
How to provide feedback on the methodology
Who to contact for more information
Appendix 1: Example ecosystem maps
Example 1: Transport for London release of transport data
Example 2: Leeds Bins app
Example 3: School energy-saving application
Example 4: The role of sharing data in supply chain optimisation
Example 5: Public health data challenge ecosystem for snakebite
Example 6: The FCA Digital Sandbox
Appendix 2: Further reading
Related tools
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data
ecosystems
This text is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution ShareAlike 4.0 – International License
How can it be improved?We welcome feedback and
comments.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems2

Why should we map data
ecosystems?
Data infrastructureis made up of data assets, standards,technologies, policies and
the organisations that steward and contribute to them.
Astrong data infrastructurewill be as open as possibleand designed to benefit
everyone. It will support an ecosystem of organisations that collaborate to ensure
that the infrastructure issustainably funded, istrusted and trustworthyand
maximises the creation ofvalue from its data assets.
Data infrastructure can be hard for people to visualise and understand. We need
tools to help us understand how data is being accessed, used and shared across
organisations and communities.
A data ecosystem consists of all the people, communities, and organisations that
are stewarding data, creating things from it, deciding what to do based on it,
influencing any of those activities, or are affected by any of those activities. A data
ecosystem map illustrates the data and other value exchanges in an ecosystem.
Creating a map of a data ecosystem can help us to understand and explain where
and how the use of data creates value. It can help to identify the key organisations
collecting, stewarding and using data, the relationships between them and the
different roles they play. Representing ecosystems in detailed maps can be
particularly useful when contexts are complex, not well understood or not yet fully
developed.
A data ecosystem map can be used to describe how data is being shared across
The Data Spectrum. A map can show how open data isbeing used to deliver a
service, or how data is beingshared in more limitedways, for example, to enable
access to personal data to support research, or internally within an organisation, or
between a specific group of stakeholders.
There are benefits to be gained not only from having a map of a data ecosystem,
but also from the process of drawing it.
Mapping requires you to consider different people, organisations, relationships and
ideas in the system, and can generate useful insights and talking points. As a
collaborative process it can build understanding of a data ecosystem across
different stakeholders. The end product is useful as a communication and planning
tool to support engagement and implementation of a data project across the data
ecosystem.
Data ecosystems can be mapped to support different objectives. Primarily we see
this tool used to map an ecosystem that describes the data and value flows in a
particular sector, place (country, city, etc.) or around a particular challenge that
needs to be solved (for example climate change), with the aim to improve the
ecosystem to solve common challenges, including business or societal challenges.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems3

We also see ecosystem mapping around the data held or used by a single
organisation with the goal of improving an organisational strategy to use and share
data within its wider ecosystem. For these objectives and potential others, the
following methodology will provide useful guidance all the same.
We have found that creating data ecosystem maps of existing systems can help to:
●
develop a shared understanding of the variety of ways in which participants
currently create value from data
●
identify gaps and opportunities to improve the data ecosystem by creating
additional value and ensuring the ecosystem distributes value equitably
●
identify the potential impacts of changing how data is accessed, used and
shared
●
identify the potential users and communities who might benefit from the
creation of new data infrastructure in a sector
●
clarify roles and responsibilities to help improve an ecosystem
●
help adopt best practices such as:
○
identifying where standards could add value and support data flows
○
setting up organisations to steward data on behalf of others, such as
data institutions
○
implementing innovation schemes to foster data use and support a
new group of data users
●
support engagement, eg by identifying key stakeholders
We have also found that the benefits of mapping data ecosystems can vary
depending on the organisations involved. For example:
●
Businesses can look to see how data can improve services or reduce costs,
benefitting their bottom line, or to plan and communicate the impact of their
environmental, social and governance efforts.
●
Charities, nonprofits and academia can map data ecosystems of their
problem or research area to understand who else is working on the
problem, find partners and funding sources, and plan their own use of data
●
Government agencies, public bodies and regulators can use data
ecosystem mapping to find efficiencies in internal operations, understand
how end users are receiving value from services, or plan data infrastructure
interventions
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems4

Example ecosystem map
Here is an example of a data ecosystem map that we have developed at the ODI.
An ecosystem map can be a quick sketch or a more polished illustration.
UsingKumu, we have mapped the data ecosystem forOpen Climate Fix, a
not-for-profit research and development lab that focuses on tackling climate
change, to improve forecasting for the generation of electricity from solar energy
sources.
This diagram shows how individual organisations often don’t have all the data
necessary to address a problem. But working together to collect, share and use
data can help to grow markets, improve decision making and adapt to changing
environments.
A data ecosystem map is able to illustrate:
●
data assets that are being accessed, used and shared
●
relationships and roles of the various people, organisations and technologies
involved in the ecosystem
●
flows of value besides just data, including insights, money, and products
and services.
●
opportunities to improve the data ecosystem through changes in the data
infrastructure such as creating adata institutionor launching adata access
initiative.
For a short video tutorial on mapping data ecosystems, our free webinar ‘Data
ecosystem mapping: plotting the journey from data to value for your business’ is
available online. Please note this webinar is publicly available but is not openly
licensed. Registration is required to access the recorded webinar.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems5

The PassivSystems and Open Climate Fix data ecosystem
BysharingPVcelldatawithOpenClimateFix,PassivSystemsaimstoreceiveinsightson
howtobemoreenergyefficient,makingrenewableenergyfinanciallysustainable.Explorethe
map here.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems6

Methodology
There are different ways to map out your data ecosystem, each of which has
benefits and drawbacks, but this works best as a collective exercise, enabling
knowledge sharing and collaboration:
●
On your own, or with some colleagues
If you have a good knowledge of the data flows in an ecosystem, you can
use this methodology by yourself – all you need is a pen and paper, or digital
drawing software. This can be especially useful when it is difficult to get
participants together. The drawbacks of this are that it is harder to verify
whether your drawing is an accurate representation of the data flows. One
way to overcome this is to share the map you create with other stakeholders
in the ecosystem as a starting point for discussion, and then use their
comments and queries as a way to explore the ecosystem in more detail.
●
In a workshop setting
If you can bring together a group of three to 10 people who are involved in
different areas in the ecosystem, and have facilitators in the room, you can
draw the ecosystem map together in a workshop setting. Ideally, you will
need one to two hours of workshop time to draw the ecosystem map, with
two to three rounds of written follow-up after the workshop to develop a
shareable ecosystem map.
●
Online
If you are unable to convene a group in-person, data ecosystem mapping
still works very well online. Similarly to a workshop, gather no more than 10
people from different roles to create a digital map. This can be done via
collaborative drawing programmes, or with a mapper screen sharing to get
input from the team. It is best to have video conferencing capabilities to
make the setting more comfortable and dynamic.
We loosely follow the methodology ofrich picturing.This means that your drawings
don’t have to follow a set structure or format, but they should contain as much
detail as you think you need to understand the ecosystem. Maps can get very busy,
very quickly, once you start drawing out the ecosystem, so we suggest focusing on
the main value exchanges in a specific use case rather than trying to be completely
comprehensive (at least at first).
If you are starting this exercise without a strong understanding of the important
stakeholders and relationships, you can begin by selecting key stakeholders that
you know have involvement or interest in your use case and conduct interviews with
them.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems7

Defining the goal of mapping the data ecosystem
Identify the problem/process/opportunity/use case you want to understand
Be clear about what the outcome of the ecosystem mapping exercise should be.
This can be understanding an existing ecosystem or considering how an ecosystem
might change, for example if new data was available. A useful tip is to clearly define
the scope of the exercise to a particular use case and start from there. By having
clarity before you start, you’ll be able to capture all the relevant information with the
right level of detail. It could be helpful to frame this in the form of a question, such
as: “What data do I need to build a forecasting model for solar availability in the
UK?” or “How can I leverage existing data infrastructure in the sector to reach new
users of my service?”. Be as clear as possible.
Mapping your data ecosystem
Before you start
Make sure you have the right supplies
You do not necessarily need anything specific when drawing out an ecosystem map
by yourself or with others – you could draw it in a notebook or use a drawing
package. If you are drawing with a few people you may find it easier to use bigger
paper or a whiteboard, with different coloured pens and/or sticky notes. You can
use online tools like Miro, Google Jamboard and kumu.
We have created adata ecosystem toolwhich can bedownloaded and printed at
home as both anA1 fold to A5, and as anA4 in English,FrenchandGerman, to
help organise your mapping activities.
Map the actors and technologies
Start with the part of the ecosystem you know best
As you draw, start with the part of the ecosystem you know best. We recommend
thinking about the most relevant organisations to your use case, including your own.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems8

Using sticky notes or drawing circles, plot all the people, organisations or services
that are linked in some way to the data. It may help to think of the organisations and
groups you need data from, partner with, are supplied by or you provide services to,
as there are likely data flows in that relationship. Stay with very specific examples as
it encourages the representation to be realistic.
Think about:
●
“What role does your organisation play?”
●
“Who are your users, customers, suppliers, service providers and partners?”
●
“Who are the relevant actors from the public, private or third sectors?”
●
“Where does data innovation – the creation and application of new
knowledge to improve the world using data – take place in the ecosystem?”
●
“Who else plays a key role in governing access, use or sharing of data in
your ecosystem?”
Our example ecosystem map includes a variety of different actors, including data
providers,data intermediaries, service providersand customers.
Map the ‘formal’ value exchanges
Now that we have some of the actors, we’re going to start mapping the flows and
exchanges in the ecosystem. Start with the data that is shared or used by different
actors, drawing lines and adding labels to indicate what data is being shared or
used. What types of value are these data flows powering? Draw similar lines for
exchanges of services and money.
Think of other types of exchange. Do the actors within the ecosystem provide
documents, services or physical goods? Is there an exchange of money, eg fees for
services? Add additional arrows for each of these to populate your map.
Think about:
●
“What data does your organisation and other organisations access, use and
share?”
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems9

●
“How is data shared? (eg via downloads, APIs, portals...)”
●
“Is data shared reciprocally?”
●
“Who is funding what? What services are being provided?”
Tangible value could include:
●
Data– Which datasets are you mapping? What is thesource?
●
Reports and documents – Are there relevant reportsand documents that
support the data ecosystem?
●
Physical goods– Are there physical goods associatedwith the data
ecosystem?
●
Services– What services are relevant to the dataecosystem? Eg transport,
bank accounts etc.
●
Money– Are there fees or charges related to the dataand its storage or
sharing?
●
Certificates– What certification relates to the dataecosystem? Eg data
licences, operating licences or safety certificates.
In our example ecosystem map, PassivSystems provides data on solar panel use to
Open Climate Fix through academic partner University of Sheffield. Open Climate
Fix also ingests data from EUMETSAT and OpenStreetMap to provide its software
services to National Grid.
Services and money are exchanged throughout the ecosystem between customers
and various companies in the energy sector supply chain, including solar panel
provider PassivSystems, as well as energy suppliers and regional system operators.
Draw these connections and continue with the organisations or teams you interact
with, including those involved in a process before and after, focusing on how data is
used across the ecosystem. Add different actors one by one and add lines to
connect them, specifying the relationship between them and adding arrows for
direction whenever possible.
Aim to capture the actors involved and how they collaborate, the types of data
used, the role of standards and the flow of funding, if relevant. Using symbols and
icons can make it easier and more intuitive to follow. Use different coloured markers
for different flows, such as data and money. It can be useful to define how data is
shared across the ecosystem according to theDataSpectrum, describing when
data is being published under an open licence or being shared in more restrictive
ways.
If you make any assumptions, or there are important points around the narrative or
storyline of the ecosystem, add these to the map as you go – they will be helpful
when writing up your ecosystem later!
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems10

Map the ‘soft’ value exchanges
Data supports decision-making with insight and knowledge. Organisations can
support each other with advice or feedback.
Add these less tangible types of value exchange to your map. It will help you
understand more about the connections and relationships between organisations.
We suggest using different dotted lines to distinguish them.
Think about:
●
“What insights and advice do your organisation and others need, use and
share?”
●
“How is intangible value shared? (apps, email, etc.)”
●
“What networks is your organisation and others connected to?”
●
“What policies and regulations does your organisation adhere to?”
‘Soft’ value could include:
●
Insights– The insight gained from the data ecosystem,for example when
to travel, or how to manage a budget.
●
Knowledge– Are there knowledge networks that wouldbe useful to note?
For example, a professional network or community of enthusiasts
●
Support– What support is required to help maintainthe data infrastructure?
This could be financial or structural.
●
Feedback– What feedback mechanisms are used withinthe data
ecosystem?
●
Advice– What advice do actors within the ecosystemprovide?
●
Network– Is there a wider network associated withthe data ecosystem?
●
Policy– What policies relate to the data or otherassets within the data
ecosystem?
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems11

In our example ecosystem map, Open Climate Fix shares insights generated from
machine learning analytics with academic partner University of Sheffield, data
provider PassivSystems, and strategic ecosystem partner National Grid.
Note on ‘traditional knowledge’:
Traditional knowledge, indigenous knowledge and local knowledge generally refer to
knowledge systems embedded in the cultural traditions of regional, indigenous, or
local communities. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization and
the UN, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions are both types of
indigenous knowledge. The differentiation between ‘formal’ and ‘soft’ value
regarding data vs. traditional knowledge may not be helpful in this context, and may
indeed be harmful by replicating colonial logics of ‘Western scientific knowledge’ as
superior to ‘traditional knowledge’.
Find opportunities
Now you have your ecosystem mapped out, what does it tell you? How does value
flow in the ecosystem? Are there potential future opportunities to share value in
other ways, for example, to make data more open or to offer new kinds of support?
You can draw those onto the ecosystem map in a different colour or style.
Think about:
●
“Where are there blockers to data access or where is data being shared
inefficiently that improvements to the data infrastructure could address?”
●
“What data is your service missing that would have a big impact on your
stakeholders?”
●
“Are a lack of data standards inhibiting use of existing data in the
ecosystem?”
●
“Are there blockers to data sharing that could be addressed by setting up
independent organisations to steward data on behalf of others?”
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems12

Below are some potential future opportunities you could consider:
●
Improving data flow– What methods could be used toimprove data flows
between actors in an ecosystem?
●
Identifying impacts– What are the impacts of changinghow data is
accessed, used and shared?
●
Creating new benefits– Which potential users andcommunities could
benefit from new data infrastructure in a sector?
●
Creating new standards– Where could data standardsadd value and
bring clarity to the ecosystem?Tip:standards.theodi.orghas a helpful guide.
●
Finding new stakeholders– Which new stakeholdersshould be involved?
For example people or organisations who would be needed to help create a
new data standard.
Note:The ecosystem map will inevitably become messy,as no formal structure is
followed. This is not a problem and in fact allows you to capture as much
information as possible.
Our example ecosystem map shows the potential new and improved value that can
be provided to the energy sector if Open Climate Fix has access to necessary data
for its solar forecasting services. This helps potential partners, funders and end
users understand the impact Open Climate Fix’s plans could have to help
decarbonise the UK.
Writing up and improving your map
This section is relevant whether you are creating an ecosystem by yourself, with a
couple of people, or through a workshop setting.
Write up narrative
Once you have finished drawing the ecosystem, it can be useful to write up the
narrative in text in a few paragraphs (maximum of two pages), based on the
ecosystem map and the narrative notes. If you ran a workshop, or created the map
with others, share the write-up and picture of the ecosystem map with the relevant
stakeholder contacts so they can review the content, add any missing information,
or clarify questions.
Share the ecosystem map
While you might create an ecosystem to help your own understanding of value
flows, sharing this more widely with others can help to clarify whether the maps are
accurate and explain how processes work. This can include other actors involved in
the process, to challenge assumptions and help you arrive at a more accurate
picture. It can also include external stakeholders who may benefit from
understanding the ecosystem. It can be useful to print the ecosystem maps on
posters to encourage discussion.
Design ecosystem map using tools and icons
If the ecosystem map is to be shared with a wider audience, a cleaner and more
intuitive design may be useful. Be aware that a very “finished” look may discourage
people from challenging the maps, so we recommend creating and sharing less
polished ecosystem maps, to encourage discussion. Make sure to explain the
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems13

scope of the ecosystem, the purpose of mapping it, the narrative behind it, and
clearly label the icons, arrows and other drawings you have used. Useful tools
includeKumu,draw.io, andMiro.
Returning to your map after some time to look at it with fresh eyes can help bring
greater clarity or important additional information to your map that you may have
missed the first time. This can be especially helpful if you have not shared your map
with others yet.
Next steps
Once your ecosystem map is finalised, you have various possibilities to make it as
useful and as up to date as possible.
The data ecosystem map can be used to drive different types of actions:
●
Improve understanding of an ecosystem
○
Help people understand an ecosystem, where change may be
required, and what effects changes might have
●
Explore new partnerships
○
Identify where an organisation sits in an ecosystem, and identify who
to collaborate directly with for organisational/ecosystem change
○
Identify where an individual or an organisation is required to take
action to enact a desired change in the ecosystem
●
Access or share data
○
Find new sources of data to improve internal operations
○
Tap into existing data flows to develop new products, services or
policies, or improve existing ones
○
Use the map to help you understand how you can share data to
solve industry or broader societal challenges
●
Improve services, projects or policies
○
Inform a project that is building a data-enabled service
○
Identify where initiatives or projects are repetitive, where gaps are,
and how to reach better impact through wider initiatives
●
Increase impact
○
Identify long term impact of data and value exchanges on a whole
ecosystem
○
Contribute to wider societal impact creation
Data Ecosystem Mapping can be used as a step in a broader process of
understanding the data landscape in a particular sector, place or around a societal
or business challenge. It is featured as thesecondplayin the ODI’sData
Landscape Playbook. The Data Landscape Playbook supportsorganisations
working on data access initiatives, helping them tackle common challenges by
conducting a ‘data landscape review’ - a broad range of activities that we know will
help organisations launching data access initiatives understand better the context
they operate in, and the ways they can use data most effectively.
Following the Playbook, other next steps that you can take after mapping your data
ecosystem include:
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems14

●
Conductingdata ethicsassessments around the use cases that have been
mapped, or regarding some of the identified connections
●
Creatingdata inventoriesto understand what relevantdata is currently being
collected, shared or managed
●
Adopting or buildingopen standards for data, so thatdifferent organisations
within an initiative or across a sector can interoperate better
●
Designinglogic modelsto help initiatives move frominitial inputs and
activities to the ultimate impact they are trying to achieve
When working on new initiatives based on an ecosystem map, be aware that this
map may need to be updated in the future. It may be useful to check if new
stakeholders or new exchanges have emerged.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems15

Additional tips for facilitators of data ecosystem
mapping
Running a workshop
Before the workshop
Identify people who could contribute
Get a range of different stakeholders from across the data ecosystem in the room or
online to ensure a balanced perspective of processes and links. If that is not
possible, do not worry – even a few people can produce a useful ecosystem map.
The table in the scoping section lists some of the likely roles.
Note:Be aware of the political context and the environmentyou are working in. In
certain situations, for someone to publicly declare in a workshop that a certain
organisation/stakeholder is managing their data badly or is refusing to share could
be difficult. The facilitation of the workshop needs to reflect this particular context,
making it possible for people to share their knowledge in a safe environment.
Prepare the workshop
To run your workshop you will need:
a.
ideally, two facilitators to guide the workshop – Facilitator 1 should
explain the methodology, ask questions and draw the map.
Facilitator 2 sense-checks the answers given, asks additional
questions and captures the narrative alongside the drawing. If you
only have one facilitator, we suggest:
i.
recording the workshop and listening to it afterwards to
make sure the narrative around the ecosystem map is
captured;
ii.
asking members of the group to take notes on sticky notes
as you go through the exercise
b.
participants from across your data ecosystem
c.
a big enough room, with a whiteboard and different coloured
markers (it works best if drawings can be erased and corrected
during the workshop), or a suite of products that ideally allows for
videoconferencing (possibly with breakout rooms), presenting slides,
and collaborative drawing.
d.
sticky notes and pens
During the workshop
Explain the process (15 mins)
Introduce everyone, explain what the goal of the workshop is, give a short
introduction to ecosystem maps, explain to stakeholders that they are here to draw
the ecosystem map together. Answer any questions.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems16

Draw the ecosystem map (30–90 mins)
Facilitator 1: Start by asking participants about what they know, typically about their
organisations, or the service they are trying to better understand. We recommend
following the previous steps. Start with the most relevant actors and data
exchanges and then add applications and related value flows such as services and
funds. In our experience, it works best to use a very specific example that most
participants are familiar with, as it encourages the representation to be realistic.
Suggested questions:
●
“What role does your organisation play in the data sharing ecosystem?”
●
“What data do you need?”
●
“What data do you use?”
Draw them on the whiteboard and then continue with the organisations or teams
they interact with, including those involved in a process before and after, focusing
on how data is used across the ecosystem. Add different players one by one and
add lines to connect them, specifying the relationship between them and adding
arrows for direction whenever possible.
Suggested questions:
●
“Who provides the data, how do you access it?”
●
“What data do you release, who uses it and for what?”
●
“Is data shared reciprocally, what value is exchanged for data? (for example
services or subscription fees)”
Aim to capture the actors involved and how they collaborate, the types of data
used, the role of standards and the flow of funding, if relevant. Using symbols and
icons can make it easier and more intuitive to follow – for example, labelling data
exchanges in some way to add a bit more context, perhaps by using thicker lines
for key data exchanges, or a marker to indicate open (versus shared or closed) data
sharing, or using different coloured markers for different flows, such as data and
money. It can be useful to clearly define how data is shared across the ecosystem
according to theData Spectrum.
Suggested questions:
●
“What format is data released/used in?”
●
“Are there any data standards in place?”
●
“Who is funding what?”
Encourage stakeholders in the room to clarify anything you do not understand, to
add detail or to correct anything that is misrepresented, by asking them questions.
It will be more difficult to remember details after the workshop. Go through the list of
actors and flows defined in step 4 to make sure you cover the most relevant
aspects.
Note:The ecosystem map will inevitably become messy,as no formal structure is
followed. This is not a problem and in fact allows you to capture as much
information as possible.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems17

Capture the storyline (30–90 mins, in parallel to drawing the ecosystem)
Facilitator 2 (if present): As the ecosystem map is drawn, use the sticky notes or
online tools to capture the storyline. Write down in as much detail as possible the
process and relationships explained on the ecosystem map. Encourage
stakeholders in the room to clarify anything that is unclear, to add detail or to correct
anything that may be misrepresented, by asking them questions. Go through the list
of actors and flows to make sure you cover the most relevant aspects.
Information may not be provided in a chronological or structured way, so moving
sticky notes around as needed will help you to capture the explained process as
accurately as possible.
Cross-check that content was captured correctly (15 mins)
Facilitators 1 and 2: Summarise the explained process using the ecosystem map
and storyline back to the participants and check that it was captured correctly. Take
note of anything that was misunderstood and note down any areas where follow-up
is needed after the workshop. If ecosystem mapping in person, take pictures of the
ecosystem map and notes; the appsTiny ScannerandPost-it Pluswork well. We
recommend sharing photos and online drawings with participants for transparency.
Identify one of the stakeholders from each part of the ecosystem to be the contact
person for follow-up questions.
Running interviews
If you are having trouble organising a workshop, you can also get useful information
from a few interviews with subject matter experts to get a better sense of the
ecosystem. You should try and interview people with different perspectives on the
ecosystem, as you would have in a cross-functional workshop.
You can begin by using thisinterview templatewhichoutlines some questions that
may help you obtain useful information from your interviewee. Not all of the
questions may be relevant and the order of questions may need to be switched
based on how the interview is progressing. After the first interview, you may have
some further contacts and information in order to progress.
How to provide feedback on the methodology
We are looking for feedback on how this tool works for you. In particular, we are
keen to learn more about:
●
thoughts on the methodology we have outlined and how we can improve it
●
how the tool is being used in different contexts and countries
●
how useful do people find the tool, and where we can improve it
●
different (physical or online) tools people can use to design their ecosystems
●
different examples of ecosystem maps you have created
Please leave comments on this document, or send any other feedback you
have tofeedback@theodi.org
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems18

Who to contact for more information
Contactbizdev@theodi.orgto discuss how the ODI canhelp you understand the
ecosystems you are part of, as well as how our other tools can support you to use
data better.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems19

Appendix 1: Example
ecosystem maps
Example 1: Transport for London release of
transport data
This is a polished example of an ecosystem map. It is based on a case study
described in our report onusing open data for publicservices.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems20

Example 2: Leeds Bins app
This is a sketch of the data ecosystem that exists around the Leeds Bins app.
Similarly to the TfL example, it is based on a case study described in our report on
using open data for public services.
Example 3: School energy-saving application
This map illustrates the data ecosystem that supports an application that helps
schools to be more energy efficient. This map has beendrawn using Kumu.ioto
make it easier to explore online.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems21

Example 4: The role of sharing data in supply chain
optimisation
BysharingengineeringdatasecurelyacrosstheAPROCONEplatform,Airbusis
significantlyreducingtimespentinthedesignprocess,optimisingthesupplychain
and reducing costs.Explore the map here.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems22

Example 5: Public health data challenge ecosystem
for snakebite
A data ecosystem map showing how combining existing data on snakebite
incidence and envenoming with related data such as climate, ecology, and
urbanisation could help better predict the level of snakebite incidence and
envenoming and the resources that need to be allocated for snakebite
management.Explore the map here.
Example 6: The FCA Digital Sandbox
A data ecosystem map showing how the Digital Sandbox innovation platform uses
synthetic data, expert advice and code testing technology to help FinTechs improve
their product offering, thus providing better value to their customers.Explore the
map here.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems23

Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems24

Appendix 2: Further
reading
Related tools
●
TheData Landscape Playbookcan help you understandthe wider context
of the ecosystem you are mapping, and provides tools to support a data
access initiative.
●
TheData Ethics Canvashelps identify and manage ethicalissues at the start
of a project that uses data, and throughout, and can help mitigate risks
identified in the data ecosystem map.
●
TheSustainable Data Access Workbookhelps organisationsthat steward
data to make better decisions about their revenue models to improve their
data ecosystem.
●
TheTrustworthy Data Stewardship Guidebookhas beencreated to help
organisations assess, build and demonstrate both their trust and their
trustworthiness amongst other stakeholders in the data ecosystem.
●
TheData and Public Services Toolkithelps peopledesigning and delivering
public services to use data more effectively to improve their data ecosystem.
Open Data Institute v2, updated in April 2022 / Mapping data ecosystems25