

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20151
technical

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20152
Table of Contents
How to view and download the Open Data Maturity Model
3
Executive summary
3
Foreword
3
Introduction
•	  Background	and	history
•	  Developing	the	model
•	  Acknowledgements
5
Overview of the Open Data Maturity Model
•	  How	is	the	model	structured?
•	  How	does	the	model	relate	to	existing	work?
•	  What	is	the	scope	of	the	model?
•	  How	can	the	model	be	applied?
8
The five maturity levels
10
The five organisation themes and related activities
11
The two aspects of open data practice - publication and reuse   
12
How to perform an assessment
•	  Setting	an	assessment	process
•	  Prioritising	and	aligning	your	activities
12
Theme 1. Data management processes
•	  Building	a	process	to	support	data	release
•	  Developing	standards	and	adoption	
•	  Developing	data	governance
•	  Managing	sensitive	data
15
Theme 2. Knowledge and skills
•	  Developing	open	data	expertise
•	  Knowledge	management
20
Theme 3. Customer support and engagement
•	  Developing	an	engagement	process	with	data	reusers
•	  Documenting	your	open	data
•	  Building	a	reuser	support	process
•	  Creating	open	data	community	norms
23
Theme 4. Investment and financial performance
•	  Ensuring	financial	oversight
•	  Developing	dataset	valuation	processes
•	  Building	open	data	into	procurement	practices
27
Theme 5. Strategic oversight
•	  Shaping	open	data	strategy
•	  Asset	catalogue	management
30

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20153
How to view and download the Open Data Maturity Model
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	is	 available	to	  explore	online	and	   download	as	  a	 Google	Doc,	
Excel	file	and	PDF	at:	http://theodi.org/guides/open-data-maturity-model
Executive summary
The	   Open	Data	    Maturity	Model	is	 being	developed	by	  the	  Open	Data	    Institute	and	   the	  Department	
for	  Environment,	Food	&	 Rural	Affairs	to	help organisations assess how effectively they 
publish and consume open data.	
The	   model	supports	the	   assessment	of	  operational	and	   strategic	activities	around	open	data,	
provides	guidance	on	  potential	areas	for	  improvement,	and	   helps	organisations	compare	
themselves	against	one	   another	to	 highlight	their	   respective	strengths	and	   weaknesses,	adopt	
best	practices	and	improve	their	processes.
The  	model	is 	based	around	five themes,	each   	representing	a	broad	area  	of 	activity:	data 
management  processes,  knowledge  and  skills,  customer  support  and  engagement,  
investment and financial performance and strategic oversight.	An	  assessment	grid	   helps	
organisations	identify	their	levels	of	maturity	for	each	of	the	activities.	
Organisations	can	   use	   the	   model	to	  set	  themselves	appropriate	goals	based	on	  their	current	
maturity,	resourcing	and	   anticipated	benefits.	To	  achieve	the	   full,	   long-term	benefits	of	  open	
data,	organisations	must	take	   steps	beyond	basic	data	publication,	the	   assessment	of	  open	
data	publishing	and	consumption	is	a	strong	starting	point.
While	the	   model	has	   been	initially	developed	for	  a	 UK	   public	sector	audience,	it	 can	   also	   be	
applied	to 	any  	type   	of 	organisation	with  	little  	or 	no 	modification,	whether	they   	are  	already	
publishing	or	consuming	open	data,	or	are	planning	to	do	so.	
Foreword
The	   first	   challenges	that	   many	organisations	face	   when	becoming	open	data	publishers	are  	
technical,	largely	centred	around	how  	to 	publish	data   	in 	easy-to-use	formats	with  	clear   	licensing.	
If	 reusers	are	  to	  have	reliable,	sustainable	access	to	  published	data	then	   publishers	will	  need   	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20154
to	  consider	these	challenges	as	  well	   as	  the	   strategic,	financial	and	   operational	impacts	of	
making	their	data	open.	
Understanding	this	   organisational	change	is	 an	  important	aspect	of	  becoming	an	  effective	
open	data	publisher.	Similar	changes	take	   place	as	  organisations	begin	to	  reap	the	   benefits	
of	reusing	open	data	to	reduce	costs,	increase	efficiency	and	to	drive	innovation
.		
Organisations	are	  at	 different	stages	in	 this	   open	data	   journey.	Some	are	  only	   just	   beginning	to 	
publish	data,	while	others	have	already	undergone	significant	changes	towards	a	 more	“open	
by	  default”	model.	Many	are  	seeking	guidance	about	how  	to 	take  	the  	next   	steps	in	 their   	journey.
The	   goal	    of	  this	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	is	 to	  highlight	issues	commonly	encountered	by 	
publishers,	and	   provide	a	 means	for	  organisations	to	  assess	and	   improve	their	effectiveness	
as	  publishers	and	   consumers	of	  open	data.	The	   maturity	model	provides	a	 framework	for	
understanding	the	   different	areas	of	  organisational	change	towards	open	data,	while	also 	
identifying	the	benefits	of	that	change.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20155
Introduction
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	is	 being	developed	to	 support	organisations	in	 assessing	their   	
effectiveness	in	publishing	and	consuming	open	data.
While	the	   model	has	   been	initially	developed	for	  a	 UK	   public	sector	audience,	it	 can	   also	   be	
applied	to	  any	   type	of	  organisation	with	   little	   or	  no	  modification,	whether	they	are	   already	
publishing	or	consuming	open	data,	or	are	planning	to	do	so.
The	model:
•	  supports	assessment	of	  the	   effectiveness	of	  an	  organisation	in	 its	  operational	and  	
strategic	activities	around	open	data
•	  provides	guidance	to	organisations	on	potential	areas	for	improvement
•	  compares	organisations	to	  highlight	their	respective	strengths	and	   weaknesses,	
support	wider	adoption	of	best	practices	and	help	improve	processes
With	these	purposes	in	 mind,	the	   model	can	   be	  used	by	  both	data	managers	working	within	
individual	business	units	and	   senior	management	with	   oversight	on	  data	management	and  	
governance	practices.
The	   model	should	not	  add	   unnecessary	burden	to	 organisations	that	   are	  publishing	or	  reusing	
open	data,	rather,	they	   can	   use	   it	 to	  set	  themselves	appropriate	goals	based	on	  their	current	
maturity,	resourcing	and	anticipated	benefits.	
To	  achieve	the	   full,	   long-term	benefits	of	  open	data,	organisations	must	take	steps	beyond	
basic	data	publication,	the	  assessment	of	  open	data	publishing	and	   consumption	is	 a	 strong	
starting	point.	
Within	the	   UK	   public	sector	the	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	should	be	  particularly	relevant	to 	
organisations	responsible	for	  managing	aspects	of	 the	  UK	  National	Information	Infrastructure
1
.	
These	organisations	should	have   	a	clear   	view  	of 	their   	open	data  	maturity	and  	have   	appropriate	
targets	for	development.
1	National	Information	Infrastructure,	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-information-
infrastructure	accessed	on	2015-03-19

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20156
Background and history
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	was	   developed	as	  a	 joint	project	between	the	   Open	Data   	
Institute
2
	(ODI)	and	the	Department	for	Environment,	Food	&	Rural	Affairs	(Defra)
3
.	
The	   Defra	Network	transparency	panel	identified	a	 need	to	  measure	the	   effectiveness	and  	
transparency	of	  the	   Defra	network	organisations	as	  open	data	publishers.	The	   panel	felt	  that  	
better	understanding	of	 relative	maturity	would	help	   to	 drive	the	  organisational	change	required	
to	promote	open	data	publishing.
Defra	and	   the	   ODI	   were	awarded	funding	to	  develop	a	 maturity	model	and	   a	 prototype	
assessment	tool	   under	the	  Release	of	 Data	Fund
4
	administered	by	  the	  Cabinet	Office	and	   the  	
Open	Data	User	Group.
Developing the model
We	   began	to	  develop	the	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	by	  drawing	on	  the	   results	of	  a	 series	of 	
requirements	workshops	attended	by	  data	managers	and	   open	data	experts	from	the	   UK 	
government	and	wider	open	data	community.
The  	attendees	discussed	a	number	of	 key  	themes	thought	to	 be	  components	of	 data  	governance	
and	   management	practices.	Each	theme	was	   reviewed	to	 identify	key	   challenges,	outputs	(such	
as	policy	documents),	and	evidence	for	progression.
The  	requirements	workshops	were   	supplemented	with  	additional	research	on 	data   	governance	
and	   management	practices.	Some	comparative	research	on	  the	   design	and	   development	of 	
maturity	models	was	also	drawn	on	during	the	analysis.
We	   published	draft	versions	of	  this	   document	and	   the	   assessment	grid	   for	  public	comment.	
We	reviewed	feedback	and	incorporated	it	into	the	final	documents.
We	   intend	to	  revise	and	   extend	the	   model	in	 future	based	on	  experience	with	   applying	it	 in 	
real-world	use.	   An	  online	tool	   will	  also	   be	  provided	to	  support	organisations	in	 assessing	their   	
maturity.
2	Open	Data	Institute,	http://theodi.org,	accessed	on	2015-02-04
3	Department	for	Environment,	Food	&	Rural	Affairs,	https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-
for-environment-food-rural-affairs,	accessed	on	2015-02-04
4	Breakthrough	Fund	and	Release	of	Data,	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/breakthrough-fund-and-
release-of-data-fund,	accessed	on	2015-02-4

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20157
Acknowledgements
Defra	and	   the	  ODI	   would	like	  to	 jointly	thank	all	  of	 the	  attendees	of	 the	  requirements	workshops	
for	  their	contributions	to	  the	   development	of	  the	   maturity	model.	We	   would	also	   like	   to	  thank	
everyone	from	across	central	and	   local	government,	agencies	and	   other	organisations	who  	
provided	feedback	on	  the	   draft	documents.	The	   contributions	and	   ideas	were	extremely	
valuable.
The  	funding	and  	support	for  	the  	project	from  	the  	Cabinet	Office	and  	the  	Open	Data   	User   	Group	
(ODUG)
5
	were	essential	in	making	the	model	a	reality.
5	Open	Data	User	Group,	https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/open-data-user-group,	accessed	on	2015-03-
20	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20158
Overview of the Open Data Maturity Model
A	 ‘maturity	model’	generally	provides	a	 framework	that	   allows	an	  organisation	to	  assess	how  	
well	   its	  processes	conform	to	  industry	best	practices.	The	   model	acts	as	  an	  independent	
benchmark	that	   allows	organisations	to	 score	their	   maturity,	usually	in	 a	 number	of	 related	areas.	
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	has	   been	designed	to	  specifically	focus	on	  how	   open	data   	
practice	impacts	on	an	organisation.	
A	 completed	assessment	against	this	   model	will	   give	   an	  organisation	a	maturity score	for  	a 	
number	of	  important	activities,	namely	how data is released, how it is governed	and 	how 
datasets are valued.	 The	   score	will	   reflect	the	   maturity	of	  the	   organisation’s	processes	in	 a	
specific	area	and	can	be	used	to	identify	areas	of	improvement	and	set	measurable	targets.
How is the model structured?
The	   Open	Data	   Maturity	Model	consists	of	 15	  organisational	activities,	e.g.	   data	   release	processes	
or	adoption	of	community	norms,	which	are	each	explained	in	this	paper.
The	   activities	are	  grouped	into	   five	   themes	that	   categorise	the	  activities.	These	have	been	derived	
from	the	   categories	used   	in	  a	 “balanced	scorecard”
6
	to 	assess	and 	monitor	organisational	
performance.	This	   reflects	the	   goal	   to	  assess	the	   variety	of	  ways	in	 which	open	data	practice	
may	impact	on	an	organisation.
Activities	can	   also	   be	  grouped	according	to	  whether	they	   relate	to	  the	  publication	of	  data,	reuse	
of	data	or	both	of	these	areas.	These	are	referred	to	as	aspects.
The	   overall	structure	of	 the	  model	is	 reflected	in	 the	  assessment	grid	   that	   accompanies	this	   paper	
(see	Appendix).	We	recommend	that	you	review	the	grid	alongside	this	document.
An	  organisation	will	  assess	its	  maturity	against	each	of	  the	   activities	in	 the	   model,	producing	a	
maturity	score	from	   1-5	  for	  each	activity.	These	five	maturity levels	use	   names	drawn	from	   similar	
five-point	schemes	in	 other	maturity	models:	initial,	repeatable,	defined,	managed,	and	   optimising.
Each	of	  the	  maturity	levels	has	   a	 definition	which	describes	the	  key	   characteristics	of	  an	  activity	
occurring	at	  that	   level.	For	   lower	scores,	activities	are	   likely	to	  be	  ad	  hoc,	   while	at	  higher	levels	
processes	will	be	more	refined.
6	Balanced	Scorecard,	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balanced_scorecard,	accessed	on	2015-01-30

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 20159
To	  help	   motivate	organisations	to	 progress	through	the	  levels	of	 maturity,	each	of	 the	  activities	
is	 associated	with	   a	 description	of	  the	beneficial effects	that	   follow	from	increased	maturity	
in	the	activity.
The	various	elements	of	the	model	are	covered	in	more	detail	later	in	the	paper.
How does the model relate to existing work?
While	there   	are  	other   	efforts
7	8
,	 to	 assess	maturity	of	 data	   management	and	   governance	practices,	
these	existing	models	do	not	adequately	address	the	issue	of	open	data.
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	has	   been	developed	with	   reference	to	  existing	maturity	models	
that  	measure	other	areas	of 	organisational	maturity
9
.	 Organisations	that  	are 	already	applying	other   	
maturity	models	should	find  	that  	the 	Open	Data   	Maturity	Model	aligns	well   	with  	other   	approaches.
The	   model	also	   complements	the	  Open	Data	   Certificates,	which	provide	publishers	with	   feedback	
on	  how	   effectively	they	   are	   publishing	individual	datasets
10
.		 The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	
assesses	effectiveness	at	  the	  organisational	level.	Mature	organisations	will	  be	  able	   to	  routinely	
publish	datasets	that	are	likely	to	gain	a	higher	level	of	certification.
What is the scope of the model?
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	is	 not	   intended	to	  offer	    a	 prescriptive	description	of	  exactly	how  	
organisations	should	publish	or	  reuse	open	data.	Rather,	the	   model	focuses	on	  the	   general	
behaviours	that	an	organisation	should	exhibit	and	the	processes	it	should	adopt.	
For	   example,	the	   model	highlights	data	governance	as	  an	  important	organisational	activity.	
It	 suggests	that  	a	 robust,	well-defined	and	   widely	deployed	data	governance	process	is	 a	
characteristic	of	  a	 mature	open	data	organisation.	The	   model	also	   notes	that	   a	 well-designed	
data	   governance	process	will	  involve	clear	ownership	over	   data	   and	   cover	elements	such	as	  data   	
quality	management.	However,	it	 does	not	  recommend	a	 specific	data	   governance	process	that  	
organisations	should	adopt.
7	IBM	Data	Governance	Council	Maturity	Model,	https://www-935.ibm.com/services/uk/cio/pdf/leverage_wp_
data_gov_council_maturity_model.pdf,	accessed	on	2015-03-25
8	Stanford	Data	Governance	Maturity	Model,	http://web.stanford.edu/dept/pres-provost/irds/dg/files/
StanfordDataGovernanceMaturityModel.pdf,	accessed	on	2015-03-25
9	See,	for	example:	Capability	Maturity	Model,	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability_Maturity_Model,	accessed	
on	2015-01-30
10	Open	Data	Certificates,	https://certificates.theodi.org,	accessed	on	2015-03-19

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201510
Individual	organisations	should	implement	these	processes	based	on	  their	   needs.	It	 would	be	
overly	prescriptive	for	  this	   model	to	  recommend	processes	that	   could	be	  usefully	applied	in 	
every	organisation.
While	we	  expect	that	   best	   practices	will	  eventually	emerge	for	  many	of	 these	areas	of	 activity,	
that	detail	is	outside	of	the	scope	of	the	maturity	model.
How can the model be applied?
The	structure	of	the	model	allows	it	to	be	applied	in	several	ways:
•	  It	 can	   be	  used	to	  produce	a	 single	maturity	score	providing	a	 summary	of	  an 	
organisation’s	overall	maturity
•	  It	 can	   produce	scores	for	  individual	themes,	allowing	an	  organisation	to	  focus	on	
broad	areas	that	may	need	specific	improvement
•	  It	 can	   produce	scores	for	  individual	activities,	giving	a	 more	detailed	assessment	of 	
an	organisation
•	  It	 can	   be	  used	to	  assess	maturity	as	  an	  open	data	publisher	or	  as	  an	  open	data   	
consumer
Importantly,	we	  intend	the	   model	to	  be	  actionable:	it	 should	be	  possible	to	  use	   the	   model	to 	
both	set	  and	   monitor	goals	for	  organisational	development,	and	   as	  a	 source	of	  guidance	on	
implementing	improvements.
The five maturity levels
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	is	 based	on	  five	   levels	that	   represent	the	  different	states	through	
which	an	  organisation	will	   pass	as	  it	 matures.	Advancing	to	  the	   next	   stage	involves	creating,	
developing	and	refining	specific	business	activities	and	processes.
Setting	aside	the	  details	of	 individual	activities,	the	  levels	themselves	can	   be	  characterised	as 	
follows:
1.   Initial —	  the	  desirable	processes	are	  non-existent	or	  ad	  hoc,	   with	   no	  organisational	
oversight.
2. Repeatable	—	  processes	are	  becoming	refined	and	   repeatable,	but	   only	   within	the  	
scope	of	individual	teams	or	projects.	There	are	no	organisational	standards.
3. Defined —	  processes	are	   standardised	within	the	   organisation	based	on	  best   	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201511
practices	identified	internally	or	 from	    external	sources.	Knowledge	and	   best	   practices	
start	to	 be	  shared	internally.	However	the	  processes	may	   still	   not	  be	  widely	adopted.
4. Managed	—	  the	  organisation	has	   widely	adopted	the	  standard	processes	and	   begins	
monitors	them	using	defined	metrics.	
5. Optimising	—	  the	   organisation	is	 attempting	to	  optimise	and	   refine	its	  process	to 	
increase	efficiency	within	the	  organisation	and,	   more	widely,	within	its	  business	sector.
Broadly,	the	levels	represent	an	increasing	level	of	sophistication	in	the	organisation:
•	  moving	from	   ad	  hoc	   uncontrolled	processes	to	 those	that	   are	  repeatable,	standardised	
and  	well-managed
•	  moving	from	a	reactive	to	a	proactive	approach	within	a	particular	area	of	activity
•	  moving	from	isolated	expertise,	e.g.	individuals	championing	open	data,	through	to	
wider	organisational	support
The five organisation themes and related activities 
The	   model	is	 based	around	five	   themes.	Each	of	 the	  themes	represents	a	 broad	area	   of	 activity	
within	the	organisation:
	
• Data management processes	—	  identifies	the	  key	   business	processes	that	   underpin	
data	management	and	   publication	including	quality	control,	publication	workflows,	
and	adoption	of	technical	standards.
• Knowledge & skills	—	  highlights	the	  steps	required	to	 create	a	 culture	of	 open	data   	
within	an	  organisation	by	  identifying	the	   knowledge	sharing,	training	and	   learning	
required	to	embed	an	understanding	of	the	benefits	of	open	data.
• Customer support & engagement —	addresses	the	   need	for	  an	  organisation	to 	
engage	with	both	their	data	sources	and	   their	data	reusers	to	  provide	sufficient	
support	and	feedback	to	make	open	data	successful.
•   Investment & financial performance	—	  covers	the	  need	for	  organisations	to	  have   	
insight	into	   the	   value	of	  their	datasets	and	   the	   appropriate	budgetary	and	   financial	
oversight	required	to	  support	their	publication.	In	  terms	of	  data	consumption,	
organisations	will	   need	to	  understand	the	   costs	and	   value	associated	with	their   	
reuse	of	third-party	datasets.
•   Strategic oversight —	  highlights	the	  need	for	  an	  organisation	to	 have	a	 clear	strategy	
around	data	sharing	and	   reuse,	and	   an	  identified	leadership	with	   responsibility	and  	
capacity	to	deliver	that	strategy.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201512
Each   	of 	these	themes	have   	been   	broken	down	into  	several	activities	that  	describe	the 	behaviours	
and	processes	that	the	organisation	should	carry	out.	
The	   assessment	grid	   identifies	how	   organisations	at	  different	levels	of	  maturity	will	   carry	out  	
each	of	  the	   activities.	The	   majority	of	  this	   document	provides	more	detail	on	  the	   themes	and  	
activities.
The two aspects of open data practice - publication and reuse
We  	expect	that  	a	mature	open	data   	organisation	will  	be	both   	a	consumer	and  	publisher	of 	open	
data,	although	the	   overall	balance	is	 likely	to	  vary	   across	organisations.	Some	organisations	
may  	primarily	publish	rather	than   	reuse	data,	while	others	may  	primarily	consume	data   	and  	
have	little	or	no	published	data.	
Some	activities	within	the	  maturity	model	apply	to	 both	   the	  publication	and	   reuse	of	 data,	while	
others	are	clearly	focused	on	one	of	those	aspects	of	open	data	practice.	
To	  help	   organisations	focus	on	  the	   elements	of	  the	   model	that	   are	   most	applicable	to	  them,	
the	  assessment	grid	   identifies	whether	the	  individual	activities	are	  associated	with	   one	   or	  both   	
of	the	following	aspects:
• Data  publication	—	  addresses	the	   organisational	activities	and	   processes	that   	
support	the	   creation	and	   management	of	  datasets	that	   are	   made	accessible	under	
an	open	licence.
• Data re-use	—	  is	 concerned	with	   the	  processes	that	   support	the	  effective	reuse	of 	
third-party	datasets.
How to perform an assessment
The	   Open	Data	Maturity	Model	provides	a	 framework	for	  assessing	organisational	maturity	
across	a	 range	of	  activities.	As	  part	   of	  carrying	out	   a	 maturity	assessment,	an	  organisation	
should	attempt	to	  score	itself	against	all	  of	  these	activities.	This	will	   produce	a	 complete	
assessment	of	 open	data	   maturity	and	   support	benchmarking	with	   other	organisations.	However	
we	do	not	expect	that	all	organisations	will	obtain	the	maximum	score	in	all	activities.	
Some	elements	of	  the	   model	will	   be	  more	applicable	to	  certain	organisations.	For	   example,	
an	  organisation	handling	sensitive	personal	data	will	   likely	focus	on	  gaining	greater	maturity	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201513
in	 desensitising	data.	In	 contrast,	an	  organisation	that	   manages	only	   non-personal	reference	
data	will	not	require	a	high	maturity	in	this	area.
Some	organisations	may	   be	  creating	and	   managing	data	   as	  part	   of	 their	   primary	task	   or	  goal,   	
while	others	may	   only	   be	  generating	data	as	  a	 side-effect	of	  other	actions.	These	differences	
will	   affect	how	   important	it	 is	 to	  attain	a	 high	level	of	  maturity	and,	accordingly,	the	   level	of 	
investment	appropriate	to	support	improvement.
Organisations	should	determine	the 	target	maturity	that   	is 	appropriate	for  	their   	specific	goals	
and	   purpose.	As	  an	  organisation	gains	value	from	its	  open	data	practice	this	   may	justify	
additional	investment,	and	   a	 subsequent	raising	of	  targets	to	  help	unlock	further	benefits.	
Assessment	and	improvement	should	be	an	iterative	process.	
If	 an	  organisation	is	 transparent	about	its	  current	open	data	maturity	and	   targets	it	 may	   help  	
the	  wider	community	understand	what	it	 can	   expect	from	that	   organisation	in	 terms	of	 its	  open	
data	practice.	Transparency	can	also	help	support	benchmarking	across	organisations.
Importantly,	the	  model	is	 not	   meant	to	  hinder	the	  release	or	  use	   of	  open	data.	For	   example,	a	
low 	maturity	score	for 	a 	data	release	process	should	not  	preclude	publishing	open	data.	The   	
activities	described	in	 the	  model	should	provide	a	 roadmap	for	  improvement	not	  a	 list	  of	 tasks	
to	 complete	before	data	   is	 released.	Indeed,	it	 is	 desirable	for	  organisations	to	 experience	low 	
levels	of	  maturity	so	  that	   they	develop	processes	that	   are	   appropriate	for	  the	   organisation.	
Attempting	to	  leapfrog	to	  high	    maturity	levels	may	   result	in	 imposing	processes	that	   do	  not  	
take	into	account	the	culture,	environment	or	particular	needs	of	the	organisation.
Setting an assessment process
The	   following	process	outlines	a	 recommended	approach	for	  conducting	a	 maturity	assessment:
1. Identify an organisational lead —	  a	 thorough	assessment	will	   likely	require	input   	
from	across	the	   organisation	but	   there	should	be	  a	 clear	lead	   who	   coordinates	the  	
assessment.
2. Identify the scope	—	  the	  maturity	model	can	   be	  used	to	 assess	individual	departments	
or	  a	 whole	organisation.	We	  recommend	beginning	with	   an	  assessment	of	 the	  whole	
organisation.
3. Identify key participants —	  which	people	in	  the	   organisation	may	need	to	  be	
involved	to	help	answer	specific	questions	or	support	the	evaluation?
4. Assess and score each activity	—	  using	the	   assessment	grid,	review	each	of	  the  	
activities	and	   identify	the	  level	   of	 maturity	achieved	by	  the	  organisation.	To	  qualify	at	 a	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201514
specific	maturity	level,	the  	organisation	should	exhibit	all	  of	 the  	described	behaviours.
5. Set  appropriate  targets	—	  having	conducted	a	 baseline	assessment,	identify	
appropriate	targets	for 	improvement.	This  	will  	involve	either	maintaining	or	improving	
the	score	for	specific	activities.
6. Develop action plan	—based	on	  the	   results	and	   the	   targets,	identify	a	 plan	for  	
implementing	improvements.	
7.     Circulate results	—	  share	the	  results,	targets	and	   action	plan	   within	the	  organisation,	
including	to	 those	involved	in	 supporting	the 	assessment.	Senior	management	support	
and	   review	will	  be	  essential	in	 helping	to	  implement	improvements.	An	  organisation	
may	also	wish	to	share	its	results	more	widely.
8. Set date for next assessment —	  the	   action	plan	should	set	   a	 date	for	  a	 further	
assessment.	This	   will	  allow	the	  organisation	to	 monitor	its	  progress.	We	  recommend	
conducting	regular	annual	assessments.
Prioritising and aligning your activities 
The	   assessment	grid	   and	   this	   guidance	document	describe	a	 number	of	  activities.	The	   order	
in 	which	these	are  	presented	reflects	a	rough	progression	from  	operational	concerns	(e.g.	
technology,	standards)	through	to	  strategic	issues	(e.g.	   finance	and	   policy).	However	there	is 	
no	  underlying	assumption	that	   any	   of	  the	  activities	have	a	 higher	priority	or	  value	than	   others.
Also,	in	 practice,	the	   activities	will	   relate	to	  one	   another.	For	   example,	developing	an	  internal	
asset	catalogue	to	  help	   create	strategic	oversight	may	   also	   progress	good	data	governance	
and  	data  	release	processes.	Similarly,	developing	a	dataset	valuation	process	may  	help  	inform	
financial	planning	and 	prioritising	releases.
An	organisation	may	choose	to	assign	its	own	priorities	to	the	activities	in	the	model:
•	  When	conducting an assessment	it	 may	   be	  useful	to	 prioritise	the	  review	of	 certain	
activities,	e.g.	   to	 review	well-defined	and	   understood	areas	first	   or	  to	 align	with	   other	
organisational	priorities.	
•	  When	setting targets and developing an action plan	the	   organisation	may	   wish   	
to	  prioritise	certain	activities	for	  improvement.	Some	organisations	may	prefer	to	
implement	changes	in	  a	 top-down	style	(perhaps	focusing	first	   on	  strategy	and  	
oversight)	while	others	may	prefer	a	bottom-up	approach.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201515
Theme 1. Data management processes
ActivityAspectLevel	1	-	
Initial
Level	2	-	
Repeatable
Level	3	-	
Defined
Level	4	-	
Managed
Level	5	-	
Optimising
Beneficial	
effects
Data	
release	
process
PublicationLittle	or	no	
published	open	
data.
Datasets	that	
are	published		
[...]
Specific	
projects	or	
products	may	
have	defined	
a	repeatable	
process	for		[...]
There	is	a	
repeatable	
organisation-
wide	standard	
release	process	
for		[...]
All	datasets	
are	released	
according	to	
the	standard	
organisational	
process.
The	
organisation	
collects	and	
monitors	
metrics	on	
its	release	
process,		[...]	
Reduce	
overheads	
associated	with	
data	releases.
Within	a	 mature	open	data	organisation,	a	 number	of	  business	processes	will	   underpin	the  	
effective	management	of	  datasets.	These	processes	will	   support	both	the	   release	and	   reuse	
of	open	data.
Strong	data	governance	helps	to	  ensure	that	   an	  organisation	effectively	maintains	its	  data   	
assets.	Managing	data	quality	is	 important	regardless	of	  how	   data	is	 subsequently	licensed	
and	shared.
However	some	data	   management	practices	may	   be	  less	   applicable	for	  open	data.	For	  example,	
managing	access	and	   security	is	 not	   a	 concern	given	that	   open	data	    is	 accessible	to	  anyone,	
by 	definition.
Conversely,	there	are	   practices	that	   are	   particularly	relevant	for	  open	data.	These	include	
issues	such	as:
•	  anonymisation	and	aggregation	of	data	to	remove sensitive information	
•   redaction of personally or commercially sensitive data
•	  the	   adoption	of	  best	    practices	that	ensure that published data can be easily re-
used by third-parties
With	this	   in	 mind,	this	   theme	highlights	data	management	and	   governance	practices	that	   are  	
particularly	relevant	to	  open	data.	But	   it	 is	 recommended	that	   this	   assessment	is	 made	in	 the  	
context	of	a	wider	evaluation	of	data	governance	within	the	organisation.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201516
Building a process to support data release 
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	have a well-defined process to support the publication 
of open data.	 The	   process	will	  address	the	  technical	aspects	of	 publishing	both	new	   datasets	
and	updates	to	existing	datasets	in	a	timely	manner.
The 	release process	will	be	well	documented	and	address	key	issues	such	as:
•	  the  	technical infrastructure	used	to	 support	a	 release,	e.g.	   a	 specific	data	   platform	
or	portal
•	  the  	creation and maintenance of dataset-specific metadata
•	  the  	internal processes and workflows	that   	support	review	and  	packaging	of 	data   	
for  	release
•	  the  	syndication of datasets	and/or	metadata	to 	third-party	data   	catalogs	and  	
platforms
The	   organisation’s	standard	process	will	  describe	the	  key	   steps	involved	in	 a	 release,	identifying	
responsibilities	for	  ensuring	releases	happen	in	  a	 timely	manner	and	   to	  a	 high	standard.	
Individual	datasets	may	   be	  released	using	a	 methodology	that	   adapts	the	   organisation-wide	
standard	based	on	the	needs	of	the	specific	dataset	or	product.
Key metrics	that	may	be	collected	about	this	process	include:
•	  the  	number of datasets released
•	  the  	number of datasets released to schedule
•	  the  	number of datasets being regularly updated
•	  the  	mean time between internal updates being made to a dataset and those 
updates being shared with others
Moving from ad-hoc approaches to data releases to a repeatable process	will	bring	a 	
number	of	benefits,	including:
•   simplifying release of new data	through	reuse	of	existing	workflows	and	tools
•	  making	it 	easier for reusers to find and use a variety of datasets	from  	the 	
organisation
• clarity around whether datasets are being released	in 	line  	with   	corporate	objectives

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201517
Developing standards and adoption
Mature	organisations	will	benefit from both the use of open standards for formatting data 
and the adoption of industry standard identifiers	in	their	datasets.
These	benefits	for  	publishers	include:
•   available open source tooling	to	support	managing	data
•   easy recruitment of specific technical expertise
•   reduced burden of maintaining and documenting bespoke standards
•   increased adoption and use of published data
Adoption	of	standards	also	has	benefits for reusers	of	open	data:
•   datasets published in industry or de facto standard formats are easier to 
consume
•   datasets that use common identifiers,	 such	as	  codes	for	  geographical	areas,	are  	
more easily compared and combined
•	  reusers	can easily find relevant data	and  	documentation	by  	looking	up 	identifiers
•	  reusers	can more easily process datasets	when	they   	are  	published	using	standard	
metadata	and	packaging	formats
When	standards	are	  widely	adopted	it	 benefits	everyone	as	  costs	can	   be	  lowered	through	the  	
use	   of	 common,	standard	tools.	Datasets	that	   are	  linked	together	can	   be	  more	easily	analysed	
and	combined	more	flexible	ways.
A	 mature	open	data	organisation	will	define the technical standards that it will use when 
publishing its data.	These	standards	will	address:
•	  the	data	formats	(e.g.	CSV,	JSON,	KML)	used	to	structure	the	data
•	  the	access	methods	(e.g.	an	API)	used	to	make	data	available
•	  the	means	by	which	the	data	is	structured,	e.g.	through	use	of	standard	schemas
The	   standards	may	   refer	to	 a	 single	set	  of	 technologies	or	  recognise	that	   certain	types	of	 data   	
(e.g.	geographical	or	statistical	data)	might	be	best	published	using	type-specific	standards.
The	   mature	open	data	organisation	will	   also	recognise that as standards evolve it may 
need to revise its data publication practices in order to best support both new and 
existing consumers.	 The	   organisation	will	   therefore	track	industry	trends	and	   monitor	how  	
other	organisations	are	publishing	similar	and	interrelated	datasets.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201518
A	 mature	organisation	will	  also	research the ways in which reusers would like to process 
data.	 This	   might	lead	   the	  organisation	to	 publishing	data	   using	several	different	access	methods.	
For	  data	   analysis	the	  ability	to	 download	data	   in	 its	  entirety	is	 often	essential,	whereas	real-time	
access	to	data	may	be	better	served	by	development	of	an	API.
	
Developing data governance
Releasing	high-quality	open	data	requires	organisations	to	  apply	appropriate	levels	of	  data   	
governance	to	 their	   datasets,	addressing	issues	such	as	  data	   quality,	integrity,	monitoring	and  	
protection	across	the	entire	data	lifecycle.
A	 mature	open	data	organisation	will	implement a data governance process across all of 
its datasets.	 This	   includes	datasets	produced	internally	and	   those	it	 is	 consuming	from	third-
party	sources.
Organisations	may	   find	   that	   publication	of	  open	data	will	   highlight	existing	data	governance	
issues.	There	are	  many	examples	of	 inconsistencies	and	   inaccuracies	in	 data	   being	uncovered	
only	   after	the	   data	is	 exposed	to	  wider	review.	This	   often	leads	to	  improvements	in	 not	   just  	
the	  quality	of	  the	  data	but	   also	   review	and	   improvements	in	 the	  underlying	data	management	
practices.	The	   resulting	improvements	to	  data	quality	can	   bring	particular	benefits	when	the  	
organisation	uses	the	data	within	its	own	processes	and	decision	making.
A	 mature	organisation	will	treat a third-party open dataset as if it were its own asset.	This  	
will	  involve	providing	appropriate	feedback	to	 the	  original	source	on	  data	   quality	issues.	In	 the  	
case	of	 crowd-sourced	or	  collaboratively	maintained	datasets,	the	  organisation	will	  likely	invest	
time	in	resolving	these	issues	for	the	benefit	of	itself	and	other	reusers.
Managing sensitive data 
Datasets	may	   include	a	 variety	of	  sensitive	information	such	as	  commercially	sensitive	data   	
that	   an	  organisation	may	   not	  be	  happy	about	sharing	with	   competitors,	or	  personal	information	
about	its	customers,	employees,	or	other	individuals.	
A	 mature	organisation	will	conduct risk and impact assessments prior to the publication 
of sensitive datasets.	For	example	it	may	conduct	a	Privacy	Impact	Assessment
11
.	It	will	also	
have	procedures	to	mitigate	risk	prior	to	release,	including:
11	Privacy	by	design,	https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/privacy-by-design/,	accessed	on	
2015-03-23

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201519
•	  have	an	anonymisation	policy	and	know about the process of anonymising data
•   redacting commercially sensitive figures	or	company	names
•	  subsetting	of	data	to	remove sensitive fields
•	  aggregation	in	order	to	summarise data
• obtaining appropriate consent	from	   individuals	whose	personal	data	   may	   be	  released
•   considering the data environment	such	as 	other	related	datasets,	people	who   	have	
access	to	  the	   data	or	  people	who	   have	a	 motivation	to	  exploit	the	   data	beyond	its 	
intended	uses.
A	 mature	organisation	may	   also	seek independent, external validation of its approach to 
anonymising highly sensitive datasets.	For	example,	it	may	engage	a	third	party	to	perform	
a	motivated	intruder	test.
In	  addition	to	  identifying	standard	approaches	to	  desensitising,	the	   organisation	will	   properly	
educate	its	staff	about	their	use	ensuring	that	techniques	are	applied	correctly	and	effectively.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201520
Theme 2. Knowledge and skills
ActivityAspectLevel	1	-	
Initial
Level	2	-	
Repeatable
Level	3	-	
Defined
Level	4	-	
Managed
Level	5	-	
Optimising
Beneficial	
effects
Open	data	
expertise
Publication	
&	re-use
The	
organisation	
does	not	
provide	any	
direct	training	
or	support	for	
[...]
No	shared	
understanding	
around	open	
data	in	the	
organisation,	
although	some	
areas	[...]
The	
organisation	
is	aware	of	
where	further	
support	and	
understanding	
is	required	[...]	
The	
organisation	is	
actively	building	
a	shared	
understanding	
around		[...]
Knowledge	and	
understanding	
of	open	data	
exists	at	all	
levels	in	the		[...]
Reduce	reliance	
and	cost	of	
using	external	
expertise.
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	understand the benefits of openness and transparency 
and apply those principles appropriately.	
Supporting	the	  development	of	 this	   culture,	a	 mature	organisation	will	  ensure	that	   staff	   have	the  	
necessary	skills	and	expertise	in	a	number	of	different	areas.	This	knowledge	will	range	from:
	
•	  a	 common	understanding of the value of open data and its application	to 	the  	
organisation
•	  operational	skills	required	to	support data governance and publishing
•	  strategic	understanding,	at	  a	 senior	level,	of	  how	   to	use open data to further the 
goals	of	the	organisation
An	  organisation	will	  support	employees	in	 developing	the	  skills	necessary	to	 deliver	on	  its	  open	
data	   strategy.	This	   may	   include	offering	training	on	  key	   topics	such	as	  licensing,	technology	or 	
data	governance.
Access	to	  information	is	 also	   an	  important	component	of	  developing	internal	expertise	with  	
open	data.	The	   organisation	will	  ensure	that	   all	  organisational	standards,	datasets	and	   relevant	
data	documentation	are	accessible	to	the	staff	who	need	it.
The	   skills	development	support	provided	by	  organisations	for	  health	&	 safety	is	 a	 good	analogy	
for	  how	   an	  organisation	may	   develop	both	a	 broad	understanding	of	  good	data	management	
practices	as	well	as	identified,	accessible	expertise.	
All	  organisations	offer	    health	&	 safety	training	as	  a	 standard	element	of	 staff	   induction	and	   key  	
staff	   members	are	  identified	as	  health	&	 safety	experts.	“Data	health	&	 safety”	–	 understanding	
the	  risks,	responsibilities,	and	   actions	required	to	 ensure	that	   data	   is	 well	   managed	and	   shared	
effectively	–	 should	become	an	  element	of	 staff	   development	in	 mature	open	data	   organisations.	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201521
Expertise	in	 topics	such	as	  licensing	and	   data	   standards	will	  be	  identified	and	   made	available	
across	the	organisation.
Developing open data expertise
A	 mature	organisation	will	ensure that staff have the necessary training and support 
required to deliver on their individual responsibilities relating to open data.	This   	is 	likely	to 	
be	  one	   aspect	of	 wider	awareness	of	 the	  benefits	of	 good	data	   governance	and	   its	  application	
to	company	strategy.
It	will	be	important	that	employees	have	training	to	ensure	that	they	have
•	  an	understanding of both the risks and benefits	of	  using	and	   publishing	open	
data	and	how	that	affects	their	own	role	and	responsibilities
•	  an	understanding of the organisation’s open data policies and strategy
•	  the  	ability	to 	apply the appropriate level of data governance	in 	their   	own   	projects	
•   specific training on individual topics,	 e.g.	   technical	standards,	best	practices,	
licensing	issues
Ideally	this	   education	programme	will	   begin	at	  staff	   induction	(“data	health	&	 safety”)	and	   be	
offered	as	  part	   of	 continual	staff	   development,	e.g.	   via	  internal	training	and	   refresher	courses.
A	mature	organisation	will   	also   	work	to 	develop	skills	at 	all  	levels	of 	the  	organisation,	supporting	
both	operational	needs	and	strategic	oversight.
Where	staff	identify	additional	support	is	 required	then	access	to	  the	   necessary	expertise,	
whether	from	other	parts	of	 the	  organisation	or	  externally,	will	  also	   be	  made	available.	In	 larger	
organisations	this	   may	translate	into	   dedicated	staff	responsible	for	  managing	open	data   	
programmes	and	technical	platforms.
Knowledge management
Knowledge	management	is	 an	  important	process	in	  any	   organisation.	From	an	  open	data   	
perspective,	knowledge	management	is	important	for	two	reasons.
First,	staff	need	to	  be	  able	    to	  find	   and	   use	   documentation	on	  organisational	standards	and  	
policies.	Many	of	 these	policies	will	  also	   be	  of	 interest	to	 third-parties	such	as	  potential	reusers	of 	
published	data.	A	 public	open	data  	policy	and	   strategy	will	  help	   identify	the	  level   	of 	organisational	
commitment	to	open	data	and	identify	how	third-parties	can	engage	with	the	organisation.	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201522
Second,	both	   internal	and	   external	users	need	to	 have	access	to	 the	  necessary	documentation	
required	to	support	the	use	of	published	data.	This	is	particularly	important	for	organisations	
that  	undertake	research	projects	or  	similar	activities	that   	may   	produce	a 	number	of 	datasets.	
For	   data	to	  retain	its	  value	in	 the	   long	term,	people	who	   use	   it	 need	to	  know	about	how	   it’s 	
collected,	how	it’s	processed	and	who	owns	it.
A	 mature	organisation	will	   maximise	the	   value	of	  its	  data	assets	by	  ensuring	that	   appropriate	
information	is	 captured	and	   shared	throughout	the	  lifecycle	of	 a	 dataset.	This	   information	should	
be	easily	available	to	both	internal	and	external	users.
	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201523
Theme 3. Customer support and engagement
ActivityAspectLevel	1	-	
Initial
Level	2	-	
Repeatable
Level	3	-	
Defined
Level	4	-	
Managed
Level	5	-	
Optimising
Beneficial	
effects
Engagement
process
Publication	Little	or	no	
attempt	made	
to	identify	
potential	
re-users	for	
released	[...]
Some	teams	
attempt	to	
identify	and	
engage	with	
potential	re-
users	[...]
The	
organisation	
identifies	a	
repeatable	
approach	for	
[...]
The	
organisation	
begins	
tracking	the	
effectiveness	of	
its	[...]
The	
organisation	
is	routinely	
tracking	
metrics	relating	
[...]		
Greater	insight	
into	re-user	
needs	&	
activities.
Publishing	high	quality	open	data	involves	more	than	making	data	available	online:	reusers	
will	   need	support	in	 correctly	interpreting	and	   using	that	   data.	At	  a	 minimum	this	   will	   require	
that  	data   	is 	published	with  	enough	documentation	and  	supporting	metadata	that  	reusers	can  	
understand	the	structure,	scope	and	provenance	of	a	dataset.	
A	 mature	organisation	will	  also	consider additional ways that it can support its reusers such 
as via a help desk function or similar services.	Growing	a 	community	around	a 	dataset	might	
involve	helping	interested	reusers	connect	with	   each	other	to	 share	experiences	and	   benefits.
Open	data	is	 published	for	  a	 variety	of	  reasons.	But	   regardless	of	  whether	data	is	 published	
to	  meet	legal	obligations	or	as	part	   of	  a	 open	data	business	model,	an	  organisation	will	   need   	
to	  plan	   how	   it	 will	   engage	with	   its	  customers,	monitor	how	   its	  data	is	 being	used	and	   identify	
where	value	is	being	created.	
Developing an engagement process with data reusers
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	define a process for engaging with reusers of its data.	
For  	organisations	that	   are  	already	familiar	with	   publishing	data	   or	 supporting	external	customers	
this	   type	of	  engagement	will	   be	  an	  evolution	of	  existing	practices.	In	  other	organisations	
this	   might	be	  a	 new	process	and	   may	require	the	   organisation	to	  identify	new	roles	and 	
communication	channels.
Organisations	with	   existing	customer	engagement	and	   marketing	programmes	will	   need	to 	
consider	how	   publishing	open	data	   may	   result	in	 new	   audiences	for	  their	   data.	Cost-reduction	
and	network	effects	may	surface	additional	demand	for	and	opportunities	for	using	data.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201524
An	engagement	process	will	typically	include	a	range	of	activities
12
:	
•	  identifying	both	potential and actual reusers of a dataset
•	  identifying	the	key stakeholders in the re-user community	in 	order	to 	prioritise	
and	focus	engagement	activities
•	  engaging	with	   that	   community	to	help them understand how a dataset might be 
used and	to	highlight	relevant	new	data	releases
•	  a	 communications	plan	   to	help promote the activities of both the publisher	(news,	
events,	etc)  	and the community itself	(e.g.   	share	success	stories,	insights	into  	the 	
data,	and	case	studies)
•	  reflecting	experiences	back	into	   the	   organisation	to	  help	demonstrate	value,	build  	
business	cases,	etc.
•	  running	events	such	as	  hack	days	or	  challenges	to	encourage and incentivise use 
of data	and	to	generate	case	studies	for	wider	sharing
Ideally	the	  process	will	  be	  metrics-driven,	allowing	an	  organisation	to	  monitor	and	   improve	its 	
outreach	activities.	Metrics	gathered	by	  the	  organisation	might	include	basic	indicators	such	as:  	
•	  the	number	of	users accessing or using data
•	  the	number	of	users contributing to discussions or data updates	
•	  the	number	of	applications developed on published data
Not	   all	  datasets	will	   necessarily	need	or	  require	a	 detailed	engagement	activity.	One	   step	in 	
defining	the	  engagement	plan	   for	  a	 dataset	will	  be	  identifying	the	  appropriate	level	   of	 engagement	
necessary	and	appropriate	to	the	ongoing	investment	in	the	data.
Documenting your open data
Data	cannot	be	  used	effectively	if	 it	 is	  not	   properly	documented.	A	 mature	open	data   	
organisation	will	ensure that all datasets are published with a standard set of supporting 
documentation that follows a consistent template structure.	 This	documentation	will  	
be	  created	and	   maintained	throughout	the	   lifecycle	of	  the	   dataset,	rather	than	just	   prior	to 	
publication.
The	   level	of	  documentation	required	will	   usually	vary	depending	on	  the	   complexity	of	  the  	
individual	dataset	and  	its 	method	of 	collection	and  	analysis.	Typically	documentation	will  	include:
12	see	also,	the	ODI	guide	on	engaging	with	reusers:	http://theodi.org/guides/engaging-reusers

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201525
•   descriptive data	—	  providing	a	 high-level	summary	and	   supporting	metadata	to 	
describe	the	  dataset	including	title,	   description,	keywords,	licence,	rights	statements	
and	attribution	requirements
•   access information	—	  describes	how	   to	  access	the	  data,	location	of	  archives	and  	
mirrors,	etc
• indicators	—	  summary	statistics	that	   provide	insight	into	   the	   size,	rate	   of	  growth,	
quality	and	update	frequency	of	the	dataset,	and	data	quality
• relationships	—	  pointers	to	  other	data	sources	that	   were	used	to	  construct	the  	
dataset,	e.g.	references	to	standard	code-lists	and	other	complementary	datasets
•   scope & coverage	—	  a	 description	of	 the	  contents	of	 the	  dataset,	the	  types	of	 entity	
it	describes,	its	geographic	focus,	and	the	time	period	to	which	it	applies
•   provenance —	how	data	has	been	collected	and	processed	prior	to	publication
• technical  documentation  —	a	 description	of	  the	   data	formats	with	   reference	to 	
formal	schemas	that	   define	the	   fields	in	 the	   datasets;	sample	records	may	   be	  used   	
for	illustrative	purposes
Data	delivered	via	  an	  API	   rather	than	a	 dataset	download	will	   also	be	  accompanied	by	  a	
specification	of	the	API	implementation.
	
Creating	and	   maintaining	this	   documentation	will	   form	an	  important	element	in	  both	the  	
process	of	  releasing	a	 dataset	and	   supporting	its	  subsequent	use.	   Ideally	documentation	will  	
be	  managed	using	a	 content	management	system	that	   enables	its	  rapid	production,	review	
and	publication.
In	a	mature	open	data	organisation,	reference	documentation will often be supplemented 
with additional material,	 such	as	  tutorials	on	  using	or	 accessing	a	 dataset,	sample	applications,	
or	pointers	to	useful	tools	and	resources	that	support	effective	reuse.	
The  	effort	put  	into  	providing	both   	the  	core   	and	   any  	additional	documentation	will  	be	appropriate	
to	the	value	and	investment	in	the	dataset.
Building a reuser support process
A	 mature	open	data	organisation	will	   have	well-defined contact points that will allow 
third-parties to engage with the organisation about its open data practice.	For   	example,	
they	   will	  allow	reusers	to	  request	that	   the	  organisation	open	up	  data,	or	  provide	input	into	   the  	
prioritisation	of	planned	releases.
For	   data	that	   is	 already	released,	a	 mature	organisation	will	   also	   provide	support	for	  reusers	

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201526
in	other	ways:
•	  an	open forum for raising questions about a dataset,	e.g.   	with   	a 	support	team	or  	
others	in	the	reuser	community
•	  a	means to report errors, data quality, or privacy issues with a dataset
• communication on issues that may impact reusers,	 e.g.	   significant	changes	to 	
a	 dataset;	reported	data	quality	issues;	retiring	of	  a	 dataset;	or	  a	 decision	to	  not  	
release	an	identified	dataset
	
The	   organisation	will	   ensure	that	   the	   support	available	for	  a	 dataset	is	 clearly	defined	so	  that  	
reusers	can	have	appropriate	expectations	about	the	level	of	support	available.
Creating open data community norms
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	support not only its reusers but will also act as a good 
citizen in the wider open data community.	 For	   example	an	  organisation	will	  be	  transparent	
about	the	open	data	it	uses,	ensuring	that	appropriate	attribution	is	given	to	those	sources.
The	organisation	will	also:
•	  seek	to	share its experiences with individual datasets,	 providing	feedback	to	 their   	
publishers	on	ease	of	use,	data	issues,	etc
• be transparent about the open datasets	it 	uses	to 	help   	highlight	the  	value	of 	those	
datasets	in	the	community;	this	will	include	ensuring	that	sources	are	attributed	
• create and share case studies	that	   highlight	the	   impact	and	   benefits	of	  working	
with	open	data

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201527
Theme 4. Investment and financial performance 
ActivityAspectLevel	1	-	
Initial
Level	2	-	
Repeatable
Level	3	-	
Defined
Level	4	-	
Managed
Level	5	-	
Optimising
Beneficial	
effects
Financial	
oversight
Publication	&	
re-use
Data	releases	
are	unfunded	
and	done	as	
exceptional	
expenditure.
Individual	
projects	
may	include	
open	data	
publication	
costs	as	[...]
Project	
funding	and	
operational	
costs	routinely	
include	long	
terms	[...]
The	
organisation	
actively	
monitors	the	
financial	costs	
and	[...]
The	
organisation	
looks	for	
efficiency	
savings	
around	[...]
Costs	of	
publishing	and	
using	data	
clearly	[...]
Publishing	open	data,	especially	over	   the	  long-term	and	   to	 a	 high	   standard,	requires	ongoing 
investment in both people and infrastructure.	These	costs	may	   be	offset	by 	financial	benefits	
from	opening	data,	such	as	  through	exploiting	new	   business	models,	or	  efficiency	savings	from 	
deduplication	of	data	curation	efforts	or	easier	integration	with	third-parties.
Similar	benefits	accrue	from	the	   use	   of	  third-party	open	datasets.	An	  open	dataset	might	
replace	a	 costly	licensed	alternative.	Costs	to	  maintain	an	  internal	dataset	might	be	  reduced	
by	switching	to	an	open	collaborative	model	for	managing	the	data.
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	quantify both the costs and benefits that relate to its 
open data practice.	By 	valuing	both   	published	and  	unpublished	datasets,	the 	organisation	
will	be	able	to	prioritise	and	justify	its	ongoing	investment.
Ensuring financial oversight 
A	 mature	organisation	will  	actively monitor the financial costs and benefits of both 
publishing and using open and closed (restrictively licensed) data.	 This	will  	include	
ensuring	that	   project	funding	and	   operational	costs	for	  new	   and	   existing	projects	include	the  	
appropriate	levels	of	investment	to	support	data	publication	where	applicable.
The	   organisation	will	   recognise	the	   difference	between	the	   ongoing	costs	associated	with  	
general	data	governance	and	   those	associated	specifically	with	   open	data	publication.	This  	
will  	avoid	incorrectly	attributing	to	 open	data   	publishing	efforts	the  	entire	cost   	of	 improvements	
to	data	governance	and	similar	best	practices.
The	   organisation	will	  also	   use	   this	   financial	insight	to	 look	   for	  efficiency	savings	in	 its	  publication	
and	   use	   of	  data	such	as	  through	reduction	in	 data	management	overheads	or	  cost	savings	
from	adoption	of	open	data.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201528
Developing dataset valusation processes
A	 mature	organisation	will	recognise that investment in open data publication should be 
driven by a cost/benefit analysis.	High   	value	datasets,	namely	those	directly	aligned	with  	
delivery	of	 corporate	objectives,	may	   require	higher	levels	of	 investment	than	   other	secondary	
datasets.	
The	   organisation	will	   have	a	 methodology	for	  assessing	the	   value	of	  a	 dataset	to	  both	the  	
business	and	   end-users.	The	   methodology	may	   involve	engaging	with	   end-users	in	 order	to 	
identify	the	level	of	interest	or	demand	in	datasets,	and	how	that	data	might	be	used.
The  	lack	   of	 a	 data	   valuation	process	should	not  	hinder	the	  release	of	 open	data.	But  	by	  defining	
a	 process	an	  organisation	will	   be	  better	able	   to	  prioritise	datasets	for	  release	and	   to	  ensure	
appropriate	levels	of	investment	are	made	in	their	governance	and	ongoing	publication.
A	mature	organisation	will  	also  	be transparent about its approach to valuing datasets, 
sharing the metrics it uses with those who have interest in its data.
Similarly,	where	an	  organisation	is	 re-using	datasets	it	 should	be	  able	   to	  quantify	the	  financial	
benefits	associated	with	   their	reuse,	for	  example	by	  comparison	with	   the	   costs	associated	
with	   licensed	alternatives.	The	   organisation	will	  work	to	 maximise	the	  value	it	 derives	from	data   	
assets	and	   look	   for	  opportunities	where	switching	from	a	 licensed	dataset	to	  an	  open	dataset	
might	provide	additional	benefits,	such	as	  affording	greater	transparency	or	  the	  ability	to	 switch	
to	less	costly	service	providers.
Building open data into procurement practices
For	   an	  organisation	to	  understand	its	  rights	to	  publish	and	   reuse	data	it	 is	 essential	that	   there	
is	 clarity	about	how	data	is	 created	and	   managed	throughout	the	   organisation
13
.		 In	  some	
cases	data	   assets	may	   be	  created	or	  managed	by	  third-parties	such	as	  by	  contractors,	partner	
organisations,	or	in	Software-as-a-Service	infrastructure.
A	mature	open	data	organisation	will	ensure	that:
•   contracts used for sub-contractors clearly describe the intellectual property 
rights	associated	with	   any	   data	delivered	or	  created	during	a	 project	or	  service,	
where	possible	granting	those	rights	to	the	organisation
13	See	the	ODI	guide	on	embedding	public	data	into	procurement	of	public	services	http://training.theodi.org/
Procurement/Guide/

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201529
•	  procurement	processes	have	been	updated	to	ensure that, where appropriate, 
potential contractors provide information about how they will deliver open 
data	as	part	of	a	project
•	  contractors	provide clarity around the provenance of any data they use	or 	supply	
so	that	the	organisation	is	clear	on	any	rights	relating	to	derived	datasets
•	  procurement	practices	take into account the whole-life costs	of	a 	service	to 	favour	
suppliers	that	provide	easy	access	to	data	required	to	move	suppliers
This	   will	  ensure	that	   the	  organisation	is	 proactively	clarifying	intellectual	property	rights,	where	
necessary,	rather	than	   reactively	undertaking	costly	rights	clearance	after	   contracts	are	  awarded.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201530
Theme 5. Strategic oversight 
ActivityAspectLevel	1	-	
Initial
Level	2	-	
Repeatable
Level	3	-	
Defined
Level	4	-	
Managed
Level	5	-	
Optimising
Beneficial	
effects
Open	data	
strategy
Publication	
&	re-use
The	
organisation	
has	no	strategy	
or	policy	with	
regards	[...]	
Individual	
business	units	
identify	benefits	
to	open	data	for	
their	[...]
The	
organisation	
defines	an	open	
data	strategy.	
This	will	[...]
The	
organisation	
has	aligned	
delivery	on	
open	data	
policy	[...]
The	
organisation	
is	using	open	
data	as	a	key	
element	of	its	
[...]
Clarity	within	
the	organisation	
and	externally	
about	open	
data	strategy.
Given	the	   impacts	of	  open	data	practice	on	  internal	processes	and	   the	   potential	financial	
benefits	and	   investment	required,	a	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	  ensure	that	   its	  adoption	
of	open	data	is	closely	aligned	with	its	wider	organisational	objectives.	
Both	internal	and	   third-party	open	datasets	will  	be	recognised	as 	assets	that	   should	be	carefully	
managed.	Close	alignment	with	   company	strategy	will	  ensure	that	   objectives	for	  delivering	on	
the	value	associated	with	open	data	will	be	reflected	at	a	senior	management	level.
Shaping open data strategy
A	 mature	open	data	   organisation	will	have an open data strategy that clearly describes its 
ongoing commitments and policies relating to its open data practice.	
As 	an 	internal	resource,	an 	open   	data   	strategy	will  	set  	out  	the  	organisation’s	strategy	for  	building	
open	data	into	   its	  products	and	   reporting.	It	 will	   also	   identify	the	   roles	and	   responsibilities	of 	
those	involved	in	 publishing	open	data	   on	  behalf	of	 the	  organisation.	The	   strategy	will	  reference	
the	  key	   processes	highlighted	elsewhere	in	 this	   model,	that	   is	 for	  procurement,	data	   governance,	
release	processes,	etc.
A	 mature	organisation	might	publicly publish its open data strategy, making a stronger 
commitment to open data.	 A	 public	strategy	will	  give	   reusers	insight	into	   how	   the	  organisation	
prioritises	its	  datasets	for	  release	and	   describe	how	   to	 engage	with	   that	   process.	A	 good	open	
data	strategy	will	also	identify	how	the	organisation’s	policy	may	evolve	over	time.
The	   mature	organisation	will	  also	attempt to measure its progress against its strategy.	For   	
example	it	 may	   include	commitments	that	   set	  out	   targets	for	  gaining	and	   improving	the	  levels	
of	dataset	certification	according	to	the	Open	Data	Institute’s	certification	progress.

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201531
The	   open	data	   strategy	will	  have	a	 clear	owner	who	   will	  have	both	   the	  budget	and	   responsibility	
for	  its	  delivery.	The	   individual	processes	referenced	in	 the	  strategy,	such	as	  data	   governance,	
will	  also	   be	  owned	by	  specific	roles	in	 the	  organisation	and	   their	   responsibilities	will	  be	  clearly	
defined.
Asset catalogue management 
A	 mature	open	data	organisation	will	treat data as an asset.	 The	   organisation	will	   maintain	
a	 catalogue	that	   lists	   both	its	  own	   internal	datasets	and	   those	it	 uses	from	third-parties.	The  	
catalogue	will	include	all	significant	internal	data,	not	just	that	published	as	open	data.	
The	   catalogue	will	  support	the	  reporting	necessary	to	 deliver	the	  appropriate	oversight	over	   data   	
governance	and	   release	processes	and,	   at	 a	 higher-level,	progress	against	the	  organisational	
strategy.	The	   catalogue	may	   also	   support	discovery	of	 cost	   savings	by	  identifying	duplicate	or 	
overlapping	data	   sets	   and  	opportunities	to 	reuse	existing	datasets	in	 new  	products	and  	services.
For	datasets	that	the	organisation	owns,	the	catalogue	may	include	information	such	as:
•	  the  	risks	associated	with	   releasing	a	 dataset,	e.g.	   whether	it	 contains	personal	or 	
sensitive	information
•	  the  	value	of	  the	   dataset,	as	  determined	through	the	   organisation’s	data	valuation	
process
•	  the  	details	of	 ongoing	financial	investment	associated	with	   its	  release	(or	  re-use)	as 	
open	data
•	  whether	the	dataset	is	planned for release
•	  a	summary of the key metrics	collected	by	the	engagement	process,	etc.
For	datasets	that	the	organisation	reuses,	the	catalog	may	include	information	such	as:
•	  the	rights	that	the	organisation	has	to	use	the	data
•	  for	commercial	data,	the	costs	associated	with	reuse
•	  for	commercial	data,	the	risks	associated	with	a	price	increase
•	  the	risks	associated	with	a	dataset	becoming	unavailable	or	unmaintained
•	  the	ways	that	the	data	is	re-used	by	the	organisation

Open Data Maturity Model | Open Data Institute 201532