

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
About2 
Executive summary3 
Introduction5 
Transport Data Case Studies: France 
 
 
Jean Gabriel Audebert-Lasrochas from Trainline presenting the challenges of 
working with open transport data in France and the UK6 
Building a digital common and social network with national transport data  
Ishan Bhojwani – Etalab7 
Working across borders in France and Spain – and what this could mean for the UK 
and France 
Julien de Labaca – Transfermuga8 
Five reasons DX matters for open transport 
Eugena Ossi - Five by Five9 
Mobility-related projects at OpenDataSoft  
Fanny Goldschmidt - OpenDataSoft10 
Open Transport as a platform for open innovation ecosystem 
Bertrand Billoud – Kisio Digital11 
The history of open data in France and the UK: differences and similarities  
Samuel Goëta – Datactivist12 
Catalogue 
Zakaria Bouziane – Transdev15 
Transport data case studies: UK16 
Tom Forth from ODI Leeds, Vincent Lara from Etalab, and Christopher Barnes from 
Highways England during the UK France Transport Data Workshop’s afternoon 
Unconference.16 
Examples of collaboration on transport data: Lyon and Birmingham 
Andrew Radford – Birmingham City Council17 
Public transport open data in the UK, and what ODI Leeds has done with it 
Tom Forth - ODI Leeds18 
Engaging with your community of open data users 
Rikesh Shah - Transport for London19 
The role of ‘open’ in the development of new mobility services 
Giles Bailey – TravelSpirit20 
Challenges of working with travel data in the UK and France  
Jean-Gabriel Audebert-Lasrochas, Trainline21 
Ten ideas for cross-country transport data collaboration22 
Fanny Goldschmidt from Opendatasoft, Andrew Radford from Birmingham Council 
and Rick Bruce from ITO World prioritising ideas for cross-country collaboration 
between France and the UK22 
Appendix27 
Workshop Participants27 
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
published on 5 July 2018. Its lead authors are Tom Hunter and Lucia Chauvet. If you 
want to share feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact 
tom.hunter@theodi.org​ or ​lucia.chauvet@theodi.org​.  
 
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click the 
‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
 
This is work in progress. It is likely to be updated as 
we continue our work. Keep an eye out for updates! 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   2 

 
 
Executive summary  
Cross-country collaboration on transport data offers opportunities to 
address common challenges such as ticketing, conversion of data 
standards, and procurement best practice 
As part of its ​innovation programme​, the Open Data Institute (ODI) has been 
building on the recommendations of the ​UK–France Data Innovation Task Force
1
, to connect data innovators and data innovation across both countries. 
 
The ODI is exploring data innovation at sector level, with​ transport​ emerging as 
a priority sector. Arguably, France and the UK are leading the way in mobility 
and transport innovation, with the ​UK government aiming to be at the forefront 
of connected and autonomous vehicles research and development, and France 
2
leading and providing expertise in ​driverless metro technology.  
3
 
Both countries also have sophisticated open data ecosystems, and are ranked 
4
in the top five worldwide in the ​Open Data Barometer rankings​. 
 
In this report we summarise the findings from our full day ​UK–France transport 
data workshop, which aimed to share stories of data innovation in transport 
5
across both countries, and to identify ideas for cross-country collaboration with 
transport data.  
 
In total, ​twelve case studies ​were presented and helped reveal similarities and 
differences between the countries. ​Etalab, for instance has recently begun work 
6
on a ​National Access Point – a mechanism for accessing, exchanging and 
7
reusing transport-related data – a task that the Department for Transport is 
replicating for the UK. The Lille case study describes the process of including 
open data requirements in franchise contracts, providing fascinating insights for 
both French and UK cities.  
 
These case studies also revealed shared challenges: from the difficulty of 
converting and working with different data standards and formats; to the poor 
customer experience of ticketing outside large cities; to evaluating the correct 
users of ​Open Database Licenses; to addressing the concerns around ‘GAFA’ 
8
1
 UK government: Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (July 2016), 'UK-France Data Innovation 
Taskforce Report', ​gov.uk/government/publications/uk-france-data-innovation-taskforce-report  
2
 ​UK government: Department for Transport (June 2018), Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles, 
gov.uk/government/organisations/centre-for-connected-and-autonomous-vehicles  
3
 Wavestone (2017), ‘Smart Cities and Mobility: France is at the cutting-edge in the strategic market for 
driverless metros’ 
wavestone.com/en/trade-report/smart-cities-and-mobility-france-is-at-the-cutting-edge-in-the-strategic-marke
t-for-driverless-metros/  
4
 ​Data ecosystem: a mapped data infrastructure detailing how data is stored, accessed, used and shared, 
showing interactions between the data, its users, and related services and apps 
5
 See: ​theodi.org/topic/transport  
6
 See: ​etalab.gouv.fr 
7
 National Access Points can take various forms, such as a database, data warehouse, data marketplace, 
repository, and register, web portal or similar depending on the type of data concerned and provide discovery 
services, making it easier to fuse, crunch or analyse the requested data sets. See: 
ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/road/action_plan/nap_en  
8
See: ​opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/summary 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   3 

 
 
(the four US tech giants: Google, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon). 
 
The afternoon culminated in a series of informal discussions where participants 
aimed to identify the most promising avenues for transport data collaboration 
between the UK and France. These are included in the table below.  
 
 
 
 
Executive summary: nine promising avenues for collaboration 
between the UK and France on transport data 
 
1.Demonstrating the economic impact of open transport data in Europe 
2.Developing open source transport data conversion tools – particularly 
from General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) to Network Timetable 
Exchange (NeTEx) standard 
3.Drafting ‘Transport 101’ market summaries for both countries, to help 
private sector operators understand key differences 
4.Facilitating dialogue between politicians, transport data providers, and 
‘GAFA’  
5.Sharing best practice on the inclusion of open data clauses in 
transportation contracts 
6.Ensuring smaller towns do not suffer from ‘transport data exclusion’ 
7.Evaluating the impact of different licenses for open data and innovation 
in transport 
8.Making ticketing (particularly in smaller cities)  more user-friendly to 
work across multiple providers 
9.Including a wider range of European countries in transport data 
collaboration 
 
 
 
The final section of this report contains further details on these ideas and how 
they emerged. Workshop participants have already started work on some of 
these. ​DataCity has developed an open source tool that converts UK public 
9
transport timetables from TransXChange format to General Transit Feed 
Specification (GTFS) format.  
10
 
The findings summarised in this report sit alongside a broader set of activities 
conducted to connect data innovators across the UK and France. These include: 
three bilateral projects involving stakeholders from Leeds, Lille, Manchester, 
11
Rennes, Bordeaux, and Bristol; interviews with data practitioners; and activities 
related to the UK–France Digital Conference. 
 
 
 
 
 
9
 See: ​datacity.org  
10
 Github (2018), TransXChange to GTFS translator, 
github.com/danbillingsley/TransXChange2GTFS  
11
 Open Data Institute (2017), 'The ODI launches three collaborative data innovation projects between the UK 
and France', 
theodi.org/article/the-odi-launches-three-collaborative-data-innovation-projects-between-the-uk-and-france/  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
How are the UK and France using transport data, and 
what are the promising avenues for collaboration 
between both countries? 
 
On Thursday 15 February 2018, the ODI brought together 24 leading organisations 
working with transport data in France and the UK to share and explore areas of data 
innovation in transport across the two countries. 
 
This piece of work fits into a wider project to connect data innovators across the UK and 
France. The ODI has taken a sector-based approach, with transport identified as a key 
sector. Previous exploratory research by the ODI has shown that ​France and the UK are 
leading innovation in mobility and transport​, and both have sophisticated open data 
ecosystems, often with complementary skill sets. The UK, for example is praised for its 
12
active community engagement, while France is noted for its technical excellence.  
 
Participants in the workshop included representatives from organisations such as 
Transport for London ​(TfL), ​Transfermuga, ​data.gouv.fr,​ ​Trainline, and city councils 
131415
in France (​Lille Metropole) and the UK (​Birmingham City Council), amongst many 
1617
others. A list of all the participants, and the organisations they represent, is available in 
the appendix.  
 
This report summarises the workshop findings, and aims to:  
 
●share stories and areas of data innovation in transport in the UK and France 
●suggest promising ideas for collaboration on transport data between the UK 
and France (and potentially more European countries) 
 
This workshop and research form part of the discovery phase of a project designed to 
understand opportunities for cross-country collaboration on transport data. In the longer 
term, this will help inform the ODI’s work on global data infrastructure for trade.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
 ​Data ecosystem: a mapped data infrastructure detailing how data is stored, accessed, used and shared, 
showing interactions between the data, its users, and related services and apps. 
13
 See: tfl.gov.uk 
14
 ​See: transfermuga.eu 
15
 See: thetrainline.com 
16
 ​See: ​lillemetropole.fr 
17
 ​See: ​birmingham.gov.uk  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Transport data case studies: 
France 
 
 
Jean Gabriel Audebert-Lasrochas from Trainline presenting the challenges of working with open  
transport data in France and the UK 
This section presents summaries of the case studies presented by transport 
professionals based in France. Each case study includes: 
 
●a summary of the presentation 
●key takeouts from the presentation  
●a link to the presentation slides  
●contact details of the presenter for further details 
 
Please note that the views expressed in the case studies and presentation are the views 
of the presenters, and not necessarily the views of the ODI.  
 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   6 

 
 
Building a digital common and social network with national transport 
data  
Ishan Bhojwani – Etalab  
 
Summary​:  
 
Ishan Bhojwani presented Etalab’s current work on creating a national access point for 
18
all type of transport data in the country, which he described as “an aggregation of 
platforms to aggregate data from everywhere in France”. It was then mandated by a 
2017 ​European Union (EU) directive for all EU member states. 
19
 
Etalab’s vision is to produce an access point, and gather and improve the data quality 
from 320 territories in France, while driving adoption of the NetEx standard to improve 
interoperability of transport data across the EU member states. The access point will be 
available on ​transport.data.gouv.fr​.  
 
Ishan’s work involves seeking and openly publishing the data about each territory, 
but also approaching expert technicians to provide support for each access point (which 
is more challenging). By doing so, Etalab hopes to create not only a national access 
point, but a transport data social network that connects producers and users of 
transport data across Europe.  
“ 
The idea is that transport.data.gouv.fr acts not 
only as an access point but as a social 
network. So for each data point you’ve got the
data file but also the ability to ask questions to 
the person from that territory that can best 
answer them. 
Key takeouts 
 
●In the UK, transport data is gathered by operators at a national level, authorised 
by the government, whereas France data gathering is decentralised between 
330 distinct territories 
 
●Transport Systems Catapult (TSC), who also attended the workshop, has been 
tasked by UK Department for Transport with developing a national access point 
for the UK. Etalab’s experience has learnings for TSC. 
 
 
Slides: ​view ​Ishan Bhojwani’s presentation here​. 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact Ishan at ​ishan.bhojwani@beta.gouv.fr  
18
 National Access Points can take various forms, such as a database, data warehouse, data marketplace, 
repository, and register, web portal or similar depending on the type of data concerned and provide discovery 
services, making it easier to fuse, crunch or analyse the requested data sets. 
19
 ​European Commission (2017) ‘National Access Points’ 
ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/road/action_plan/nap_en 
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   7 

 
 
Working across borders in France and Spain – and what this could 
mean for the UK and France 
Julien de Labaca – Transfermuga  
 
Summary​:  
 
Julien de Labaca presented the story of ​Transfermuga​, from a portal for cross-border 
mobility between France and Spain (in the Basque Country) to a cross-border planner, to 
an open data project. 
 
The project started with a simple idea: a portal as a ‘single location’ for information on 
cross-border travel that would redirect to existing sites if the user needed more 
information. This portal launched in 2015. 
 
However, Transfermuga quickly realised that a portal would not be enough and that 
users needed a route planner. For scoping reasons, this route planner was limited to 
certain provinces in the south of the Basque Country. The open route planner was open 
to all actors, who all adhered to a framework agreement, which committed them to 
joining a central purchasing group, and importantly to joining a ‘medium-to-long term 
open data project’.  
 
Julien mentioned that the creation of the route planner was mainly an opportunity to lead 
a project based on transportation open data. The actors involved included two railways, 
three long distance bus lines, and five urban bus lines. The process for opening data 
was phased, with a simplified choice of licences (owner, Open Database License (ODbL), 
and Etalab) that nudged towards the most open of those three (Etalab). Julien concluded 
his presentation by discussing the future of Transfermuga, which includes moving 
towards the European NeTEx standard, and a common data feed. 
 
 
Key takeouts: 
 
●The biggest challenges of the opening data process were not technical, but 
related to the management of data, and the organisational approach of the 
project. 
 
●Do not neglect the political arena. Even if the projects are essentially technical, 
political intervention (at the local or national level) often has a very strong impact 
on the calendar for the different tools.  
 
Slides:​ view ​Julien de Labaca’s presentation here​. 
 
Want to find out more? Please contact Julien at ​julien.delabaca@naen.eu  
 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   8 

 
 
Five reasons developer experience (DX) matters for open transport 
Eugena Ossi – Five by Five  
 
 
Summary​:  
 
Eugena explained why the developer experience matters in the transportation sector. 
She defined the developer experience as “anything that a developer touches, from using 
a product to source library codes, raw data, open source code.” Since developers are 
primary users, their experience of using code, data or portals is very important.  
 
Eugena presented five reasons why developer experience is important for open 
transport:  
1.First, developers are humans. Understanding why they use the data, why it is 
important and what they can get out of it are key elements to consider. Eugena 
stated that no matter how good the data is, “if you don’t have developers using 
[it], you have nothing.”  
2.Giving access to documentation is also crucial because this will help developers 
use the product.  
3.Transparency is the third reason: being honest and having reliable software and 
data helps gain credibility.  
4.Maintaining the developer community is an important asset because the more 
involved developers are, the more likely they will contribute to the community.  
5.Finally, developers sustain innovation. Indeed, once developers start using a 
product, they will iterate and improve it, which fosters creativity and the 
emergence of new products. 
 
 
 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Developer experience is important because the easier tools used to design, test 
and maintain software programmes are, the more they will be used. 
 
●Presenting transport data in a developer friendly way will lead to more innovation 
in the transport sector. 
 
 
Slides: ​View ​Eugena Ossi’s presentation here (from slide 26)​. 
 
Want to find out more? Please contact ​eugena@fivebyfive.io  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   9 

 
 
Mobility-related projects at OpenDataSoft  
Fanny Goldschmidt – OpenDataSoft 
 
Summary​:  
 
Fanny presented examples of how OpenDataSoft clients are using open data platforms 
and portals to share and encourage the reuse of open transport data. Her key message 
was that mobility-related data can be useful outside of the mobility field, and that sharing 
it openly can lead to unexpected uses by a diverse range of organisations and 
individuals. 
 
One of the examples Fanny shared is Waze – a global community-based traffic and 
20
navigation app – and the city of Seville, who are working together to implement a 
two-way data exchange. The city of Seville is using the service to identify and address 
traffic jams more quickly and efficiently.  
 
Another is a pilot project in Paris: the city has set up pedestrian and bike counting 
sensors; air quality sensors; noise pollution sensors; and car traffic data (a mixture of 
mobility data and non-mobility data) to think about traffic redeployment around one of 
the busiest roundabouts in the city.  
 
A final example she gave is that of the city of Rennes, whose open data portal, also 
powered by OpenDataSoft, has allowed Handimap to develop a journey planner for 
disabled citizens. Sharing transport data openly can lead to unexpected benefits!  
 
 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Mobility data can be useful to organisations who operate outside of the mobility 
field. 
 
●The operation of motorways in the UK is by a government-owned company 
(Highways England) whereas in France operators are private. This has 
implications for the release and availability of open data​. 
 
 
Slides: ​View ​Fanny Goldschmidt’s presentation here​. 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact ​fanny.goldschmidt@odsoft.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20
 See: ​waze.com 
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   10 

 
 
Open Transport as a platform for open innovation ecosystem 
Bertrand Billoud – Kisio Digital 
 
Summary:  
 
Bertrand, the Head of Marketing and Communication at Kisio Digital, introduced Navitia, 
an open source software that “builds cool stuff with locomotion”. Navitia technology, 
Kisio’s core open reactor, allows: download of a open source software with six features 
(eg journey planner, timetables); download and usage of an API; and access to 400 
datasets and a community of over 10,000 developers from 25 countries on the 
OpenDataBar. 
 
Bertrand explained that although the data is ‘official data’ and originates from transit 
agencies, it may not always be high quality. To help address this, Navitia continues to do 
more work with crowdsourced open data from OpenStreetMap. For example, the team 
ran projects in Ghana and Nicaragua, where they cleaned and redistributed data on the 
portal. It is necessary to provide clean data because “all the re-users are asking for good 
data”.  
 
However, the platform doesn’t produce data: it acts as a middle-man between the 
producer and the user. The teams often hears back from the users asking for better 
quality data, but rarely get feedback from producers, which is why it is crucial to connect 
data users with data producers.  
 
Bertrand disclosed that when they first built the platform they were not sure who the 
users would be, and in the end, examples he gave were very diverse and ranged from 
SNCF’s passenger mobile information application to Facebook’s conversation web 
services application. 
“ 
...we didn’t know what kind of people would 
use the data, the software, the API – and first 
we thought is was only in the mobility sector 
but now we see that there’s a lot of usage in 
different kinds of sectors like real estate and 
recruitment. 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Navitia’s objective is to enable the creation of simple mobility digital services 
while providing the open source software (with  six key features), an API and the 
access to the OpenDataBar. 
 
●Transport data benefits the transport sector as well as other  sectors, such as.... 
 
Slides: ​View  ​Bertrand Billoud’s presentation ​here. 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact ​bertrand.billoud@kisio.org   
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   11 

 
 
The history of open data in France and the UK: differences and 
similarities  
Samuel Goëta – Datactivist 
 
Summary:  
 
Samuel, the co-founder of Datactivist, presented his views on the background of open 
data in the UK and France, and explained how it relates to the transport sector. He 
described how, in the UK, the open data journey began in 2004 with OpenStreetMap. To 
avoid misinterpretation of what can be open and what cannot, the Open Knowledge 
Foundation and Rufus Pollock then put together a definition. In Samuel’s view, the 
official birth of open data happened in the US in December 2007, where a group of 
leaders gathered to discuss and define the term ‘open data’. Then, Sir Tim Berners-Lee 
worked on the launch of data.gov.uk as well as the Open Data Institute with Sir Nigel 
Shadbolt. You can ​read more about the history of open data in the UK here.  
21
 
France has a different background, as described by Samuel: “Open data appeared in 
France in a very peculiar setting” – explaining that ​the French government used to sell 
data, but stopped this practice inline with European Union regulation. With the open 
22
data movement growing in the UK and the US, at the end of 2010, the French 
government created Etalab, to coordinate the sharing of public data. 
 
Samuel said that another difference between the two countries is that the Freedom of 
Information (FOI) law in the UK is much stronger than in France. The UK responds to 
more than 300,000 requests every year from citizens via the government platform. 
Whereas in France, the law is “quite old and quite weak as well”. The French 
government does not have this same requirement to address citizens’ requests for 
information. 
 
Regarding the transport sector, Samuel highlighted that he finds most issues originate 
from the supply side, such as government: “Governments tend to often open the data 
without consulting the public, without replying to the freedom of information request, 
without really listening to what the public wants.” 
“ 
Governments tend to often open the data 
without consulting the public, without replying 
to the freedom of information request, without 
really listening to what the public wants. 
He then presented a new initiative: ‘Dodo Data’, which will aims to radically improve the 
way Freedom of Information requests on specific datasets are dealt with. Samuel’s clear 
message is that he believes that France and the UK have strong open data communities 
and that there is huge potential for collaboration. 
21
 Wikipedia (2016), ‘Open data in the United Kingdom’, 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_data_in_the_United_Kingdom  
22
 Transparency International (2017). OPEN DATA AND THE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION IN FRANCE. 
webfoundation.org/docs/2017/04/2017_OpenDataFrance_EN-3.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   12 

 
 
“ 
Something that unites France and the UK is 
that we have vibrant open data communities 
across all channels , with many stimulating 
discussions.  
Key takeouts: 
 
●Although the UK and France did not start the open data movement at the same 
time, nor have reached a similar maturity, they both have driven communities 
eager to take the movement forward. 
 
●Freedom of Information (FOI) laws are more powerful and widely used in the UK. 
 
 
Want to find out more? Please contact ​samuel@datactivi.st  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   13 

 
 
 
Catalogue 
Zakaria Bouziane – Transdev  
 
Summary​:  
 
The aim of Transdev’s Catalogue is to create a global open data platform in the 
23
transport sector, and build a community around it, where users exchange and consume 
data. 
 
Zakaria, Lead Developer at Transdev, explained that the aim is to give data ownership to 
publishers who upload data to the platform. As the platform neither controls nor edits 
data, full responsibility is given to the publisher. When users spot errors, they can inform 
the platform which then notifies the publisher. The platform has several features such as 
notification features, enabling the subscriber to receive news and/or updates about a 
specific dataset. The code is open source and people are encouraged  to contribute, 
copy, learn from and use the code and data. 
 
Regarding community building, Zakaria shared that publishers often express their 
annoyance that data consumers take advantage of ‘their data’ and generate commercial 
value, while the publishers do not benefit from it. He emphasised that it is important to 
make clear that value sits in the growth of the transport sector, such as tourism, and not 
specifically in the data itself.  
 
 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Catalogue invites data owners to publish data using the most open licences to 
help foster innovation the transport sector. 
 
●Even in a sector like transport, which has produced many successful case 
studies, it can be difficult to ‘sell’ the value of ‘open’ to data producers.  
 
Slides: View ​Zakaria Bouziane’s presentation here​ (from slide 139). 
 
Want to find out more? Please contact ​zakaria.bouziane@transdev.com  
 
 
 
23
 See: ​catalogue.global 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   14 

 
 
Transport data case studies: 
UK 
  
Tom Forth from ODI Leeds, Vincent Lara from Etalab, and Christopher Barnes from Highways  
England during the UK France Transport Data Workshop’s afternoon Unconference.  
 
This section presents summaries of the case studies presented by transport 
professionals based in the UK. Each case study includes: 
 
●Summary of the presentation 
●Key takeouts from the presentation  
●Link to the presentation’s slides  
●Contact details of the presenter for further details 
 
 
Please note that the views expressed in the case studies and presentation are the views 
of the presenters, and not necessarily the views of the ODI.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   15 

 
 
Examples of collaboration on transport data: Lyon and Birmingham 
Andrew Radford – Birmingham City Council  
 
 
Summary​:  
 
Andrew shared his experience of working on EU-funded projects (Opticities), and 
particularly the close relationship between Birmingham and Lyon that had developed 
through a project on multimodal journey planning.  
 
Working on this project (and other European ones) has unearthed interesting anecdotes 
and illuminating insights on the differences between the UK and France. For example, 
while the UK excelled at data strategy work, European partners often excelled at the 
implementation stage. He gave the example of an EU project where a team from 
Gothenburg (Sweden) were introduced to the Electronic Transfer of Notifications (​EToN) 
standard which had already been developed in the UK, and then built a system for 
24
roadworks which improved on the UK version. 
 
Another interesting difference was that because of the emphasis on different 
standards/metrics, different data is collated. In the UK, local authorities hold/steward 
data on bus stop locations, but do not collect data on the number of people on the bus. 
In France, the situation is reversed.  
 
Andrew concluded his presentation with a reflection on the nature of European projects 
and how projects and collaboration often stop when the funding ends. These abrupt 
conclusions illustrate one of the key challenges: sustainability. 
“ 
My experience is that the UK did a lot of the 
beard-stroking thinking, but the French 
partners and some of the other European 
partners were better at implementation and 
actually getting on with it and delivering. 
Key takeouts: 
 
●In Andy’s experience of EU-funded projects, British partners are very good at 
the reflective data strategy, and French partners very good at the 
implementation stage. 
 
●Collaboration between cities funded through EU projects often grinds to a halt 
once the funding ends. Ensuring the sustainability of these partnerships is a key 
challenge. 
 
Slides: ​View ​Andrew Radford’s presentation here (from slide 137)​. 
 
24
 ​UK Department for Tranport (2013), ‘New Roads and Street Works Act 1991. Technical Specification 
for the Electronic Transfer of Notifications (EToN) 
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/181675/eton-6-te
chnical-specification.pdf  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   16 

 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact ​andrew.radford@birmingham.co.uk  
Public transport open data in the UK, and what ODI Leeds has done 
with it 
Tom Forth - ODI Leeds 
 
Summary​:  
 
ODI Leeds is one of the ODI Nodes (ODI Nodes are franchises of the ODI, hosted by 
existing organisations). Tom explained that in the UK, most of the transport power is 
currently centralised in London and speculated that Manchester and Birmingham would 
be the next major cities to become centres of transport power. He noted the current 
problem that, while the number of bus journeys and use of open data in transport has 
doubled in London over the last 25 years, it has halved in other big English cities.  
25
 
What has been done in the UK? 
 
-All stops are open and accessible through the National Public Transport Access 
Nodes (NaPTAN). They are well maintained, correct, available on open licence 
and cover all of Great Britain. However the challenge is linking postcodes to 
addresses, which requires a fee and a licence. 
-There are weekly-updated and high-quality timetables for buses, trains, trams, 
ferries, and coaches in Great Britain. 
-Fares are available as open data only in London, whereas fares are unregulated 
and not always available openly elsewhere.  
-Usage of public transport can be tracked but most of the details are 
commercially sensitive and not shared. 
 
 
Key takeouts: 
 
●The number of bus journeys and use of open data in transport has doubled in 
London over the last 25 years, but has halved in other big English cities. 
 
●All bus stops in the UK are openly available through NaPTAN; in France bus stop 
locations are not openly available. 
 
Slides: View ​Tom Forth’s presentation here (from slide 50)​. 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact ​tomf@odileeds.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
25
 Department for Transport (2018), ‘TableBus 0103’ 
gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/bus01-local-bus-passenger-journeys#table-bus0103 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   17 

 
 
Engaging with your community of open data users 
Rikesh Shah - Transport for London 
 
Summary​: 
 
Rikesh presented the work Transport for London (TfL) does to engage with its 
community of open data users. The numbers are impressive, illustrating why TfL is seen 
as a worldwide leader in the field. Around 14,000 developers are registered to access 
data, and 42% of Londoners use an app powered by TfL data. Nearly 700 apps are 
powered by TfL data. The value of open transport data is £130 million per year according 
to the latest report by Deloitte.  
26
 
TfL is now using third-party data for its API as opposed to creating its own datasets 
independently. For example, the team work with Kings College, whose sensors collect 
air quality data across London. They also partner with organisations such as National 
Car Parks and are making concerted efforts to bring other relevant datasets into the data 
ecosystem. To Rikesh, this level of impact is achieved more through culture change, 
than through technology. He noted that it needs: championing at board level; to be 
presented as a customer project, rather than a technological one; and requires early 
engagement at the design stage, ideally with champions across the company.  
 
TfL is moving towards new challenges around data partnerships: 
-How to ensure tech players not only use TfL data, but that TfL starts getting 
(enhanced) data back from some of them?  
-How to crack the issue around procurement, so that the smallest innovators are 
well positioned to bid for certain contracts and operate in a more corporate 
environment? 
“ 
There’s an argument that says: I can’t make 
‘my data’ available because if I do I might go 
out of business. Well, it’s completely a false 
argument. If you give the customer the 
information they need, and they want, that will 
create a better journey which will support your 
revenue lines  
Key takeouts: 
 
●Use different techniques to engage with different types of users. 
●As a large corporate, it can be difficult to procure from the smallest, most 
innovative organisations in the field. 
●Academics can be as useful as (and cheaper than) management consultants 
when looking at the possibilities of open transport data. 
 
Slides: ​View  ​Rikesh Shah’s presentation here​ (from slide 93). 
26
 Transport for London (2017), ‘New study quantifies value of open data to London’. 
https://blog.tfl.gov.uk/2017/10/13/new-study-quantifies-value-of-open-data-to-london/  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   18 

 
 
 
 
The role of ‘open’ in the development of new mobility services 
Giles Bailey – TravelSpirit 
 
Summary​:  
 
TravelSpirit is a community which aims to develop an open approach to the future of 
mobility, and in particular looking at how to make ‘open’ work for smaller cities in the UK 
(ie beyond London). 
 
Giles discussed TravelSpirit’s ‘openness index for cities’, one that and captures good 
and challenging practice in a range of cities. This methodology is openly available on 
TravelSpirit’s website and the company is keen to test it in other international cities.  
 
The presentation concluded with a discussion of TSio Protocol and thoughts on how 
27
blockchain could potentially solve some of the biggest issues facing transport, and 
particularly around transport ticketing. This is a particular issue in smaller cities, that 
often have multiple operators, and thus multiple ticketing options. The benefits of 
blockchain around data maintenance, and data exchange should not just be solely for 
the financial world or the gaming world, but could also brought into the transport 
context. 
“ 
Blockchain potentially provides a route to 
solve a lot of the problems that we’ve had 
around the country – making ticketing work 
across different operators particularly with 
private bus networks. 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Blockchain technology could be used to tackle some of the challenges of new 
mobility, particularly the challenge of making ticketing work across many 
different operators (see TSio Protocol​
27​
). 
 
●There is a need to be cautious about new mobility solutions simply enabling new 
monopolies or oligopolies. An open approach to the future of mobility could help 
address this concern.  
 
 
Slides: ​View ​Giles Bailey’s presentation here​. 
 
Want to find out more? ​Please contact Giles at ​giles.bailey@travelspirit.io  
 
27
 ​TSio Protocol (2018), TSio Protocol, ​tsioprotocol.com  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   19 

 
 
 
Challenges of working with travel data in the UK and 
France  
Jean-Gabriel Audebert-Lasrochas, Trainline 
 
 
Summary​:  
 
Jean Gabriel presented the challenges of working with transport data from the perspective 
of a private sector user: Trainline, Europe’s leading train and coach app. His presentation 
focused on the challenges of working with French transport data. 
 
The first barrier is that there can be a confusion between open data, and simply publicly 
available data. Some transport data producers in France publish in a format that is not 
machine readable.  
 
Another barrier is the charges made for API queries: in the airline industry for example, there 
is a charge for excessive transactions (exceeding 1,000 queries) that don’t lead to a 
booking. There are similar restrictions when dealing with rail data in France. A final barrier is 
the fear factor associated with Big Tech and GAFA (Google, Apple, Facebook, and 
Amazon): concern that this (non commercial) data in an open format will only benefit large 
(US) companies.  
 
Jean-Gabriel concluded his presentation by stating that public undertakings are often 
referred to as “a piece of their country”. His hopes are that the next reform of French and 
European mobility will provide an opportunity for ‘truly open rail data’.  
“ 
What we need is mandatory fair, reasonable and 
non-discriminatory access to raw (non commercial) data and 
the right products to allow us to build customer centric tools. 
In France there are still some limitations that prevent us from 
offering real value to our customers 
Key takeouts: 
 
●Publishing open transport data doesn’t just benefit GAFA, but a much wider set of 
data users. 
 
●Open data in transport is not just about train timetables: delays etc are also 
important. 
 
 
Slides: ​view ​Jean-Gabriel’s presentation here (from slide 122)​. 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   20 

 
 
10 ideas for cross-country 
transport data collaboration 
 
 
Fanny Goldschmidt from Opendatasoft, Andrew Radford from Birmingham Council and Rick  
Bruce from ITO World prioritising ideas for cross-country collaboration between France and the UK 
  
What are promising avenues for collaboration between 
the UK and France? 
 
The workshop concluded with a series of ‘unconference’ group discussions, culminating 
in a discussion on the most promising avenues for collaboration. (An ‘unconference’ is a 
participant-oriented meeting where the attendees decide on the agenda, discussion 
topics. The informal and flexible program allows participants to suggest topics of their 
own interest and choose sessions accordingly). From these, we have derived 10 ideas 
for cross-country transport data collaboration:  
 
1) Demonstrating the economic impact of open transport data in Europe  
 
Proving the economic value of openness in transport is crucial to get politicians on 
board. This idea was highlighted by Rikesh Shah who noted TfL and Deloitte’s 
economic impact report which shows that the release of open data by TfL is 
28
generating annual economic benefits and savings of up to £130M a year. A 
28
 Transport for London (2017), ‘TfL’s free open data boosts London's economy’ 
tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2017/october/tfl-s-free-open-data-boosts-london-s-economy  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   21 

 
 
continent-wide equivalent could be valuable. 
 
Some workshop participants mentioned the danger of over-promising 
economically, particularly with respect to job creation, as it gives politicians the 
opportunity to shut down if the jobs don’t materialise.  
 
 
 
2) Developing open source transport data conversion tools (particularly from GTFS 
to NeTEx standard) 
 
The most widely discussed ‘quick win’ was the creation of open source tools to 
quickly convert transport data from national formats to one another. In particular, 
looking at conversions between the TransXchange (UK) GTFS (Global) and 
NeTEx (European) standards. 
 
In fact, participants from the workshop have already taken this on board and 
created an open source tool that converts UK public transport timetables from 
TransXChange format to GTFS format. The ​tool is available on Github​. 
“ 
There’s about four or five open source 
conversion tools on GitHub, none are perfect 
but they’re better than nothing. Connecting all 
the open source conversion tools would be 
valuable 
 
3) Drafting ‘Transport 101’ market summaries for both countries, that will help 
private sector operators understand key differences 
 
Attending the workshop made participants realise how different the two markets 
are. At basic level, we know that the French market is more state owned, and the 
British one more market dominated. But what about centralised/decentralised? Or 
the number of ticketing options in particular cities? A quick summary of the 
markets could give smaller organisations the chance to know at a glance whether 
their solution could work in the other country’s market. Participants also 
mentioned that at a local government level, the opportunity to learn from existing 
cities – rather than starting afresh – is an efficient use of resources at a time when 
budgets are stretched.  
“ 
I’m coming from a private enterprise point of 
view. Something like this is a good opportunity 
for me to understand more about the 
landscape in France and whether our product 
could work there.  
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   22 

 
 
4)  Facilitating dialogue between politicians, transport data providers, and ‘GAFA’  
 
French citizens (and therefore politicians) are generally perceived as having more 
hostile views towards ‘Big Tech and GAFA (Google, Apple, Facebook, and 
Amazon) than in the UK. Recent research from the European Commission (2017), 
29
finds that just 53% of French citizens think technology has a positive impact on 
society, v 70% of British citizens.  
 
However, our conversations revealed that the broad areas of concern are now 
equally shared. These include the fear that large tech players will ‘crush’ smaller 
competitors. Solutions that have been tried (for example in Lyon) include price 
discrimination (charging large players, but not smaller competitors) but results 
have been disappointing: none seem to pay. Another concern, is that Big Tech is 
not sharing back its use of open data. Facilitating dialogue between politicians, 
transport data providers, and GAFA is the best way to address these concerns.  
“ 
A proposed solution to GAFA dominance 
seems to have been charge different amounts 
to different customers. You could offer data for 
free to startups and you could try to charge 
big players for the access to the data... but [so
far] it hasn’t really worked, and in many ways 
goes against the principles of open data 
 
 
5) Sharing best practice on the inclusion of open data clauses in transportation 
contracts  
 
The group shared the example of certain municipalities in France (such as Lille) that have 
started including open data requirements for franchisees who win the operation of 
transport lines. Tracking whether these requirements are successful could create 
interesting lessons, not only within France, but for UK cities as well. This is particularly 
the case when dealing with cities of a similar size.  
“ 
It’s interesting that in Lille’s new franchise for 
public transport they have added open data 
requirements. I think UK cities (and French 
ones) would do well to look at this and see 
whether it works or not. 
 
 
 
29
 European Commission (2017), Eurobarometer on Attitudes towards the impact of digitisation and automation 
on daily life (March 2017 Fieldwork). Access report ​here  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   23 

 
 
6) Ensuring smaller towns do not suffer from ‘transport data exclusion’  
 
App developers respond to market incentives, and therefore tend to concentrate 
on the big cities where there are naturally larger markets. Smaller towns and 
rural areas can therefore face a form of digital exclusion, where because of 
limited market size, operators don’t dedicate the required resource to develop 
the solutions they would for larger cities, or in certain cases even collect the data 
in ways they would for larger cities.  
“ 
 
Sometimes, if you’re a small village and your data 
isn’t being collected, it’s like you are you just kind 
of chopped off and not visible on the map. 
7) Evaluating the impact of different licenses for open data and innovation in 
transport  
 
One key question raised on the day was how transport providers who open 
datasets start receiving (potentially enhanced) data back from some of the 
bigger players that use it.  
 
The ODbL is used a lot in France by local authorities, and forces users to share 
any enhanced data that incorporates the ODbL-licensed dataset. In other areas 
in France, open data clauses have been inserted in franchise contracts. 
 
On the other hand, the use of sharealike licences can slow innovation as it 
30
makes it more likely people will have to consult lawyers or product managers 
about what they should do with data. Empirically evaluating the impact of 
different licences for open data use in transport was seen by participants as a 
valuable activity.  
 
8) Making ticketing (particularly in smaller cities) more user friendly to work across 
multiple providers  
 
Purchasing tickets can be difficult for customers – particularly in smaller cities 
across the UK and France, and when dealing with a succession of different 
operators, and multiple private bus and rail providers. Giles Bailey suggested 
that certain aspects of blockchain technology look promising in helping address 
some of the issues around ticketing. Could this solution help in France as well as 
the UK? 
“ 
Go outside of London, and each bus operator 
had its own app, different prices of tickets on 
the app versus if you paid by cash. Then you 
have to get on a train which is another app, 
another unfathomable ticketing structure.  
30
 UK Authority (2018), ‘Can there be reciprocity for open data?’ 
ukauthority.com/data4good/entry/7957/can-there-be-reciprocity-for-open-data  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   24 

 
 
9) Including a wider range of European countries on collaboration on Transport 
Data 
 
Finally, the group mentioned that while the UK and France were ideal initial 
candidates given their open data expertise, this initiative could also be extended 
to other European countries. This is particularly the case given that operators 
and transport data users will be dealing with similar issues, particularly around 
standards and NeTEx.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   25 

 
 
Appendix  
Workshop: participant organisations 
 
Organisation Country 
OpenDataSoft  France 
Transdev France 
Five by Five  France 
Lille Metropole (Mobilité)  France 
Transfermuga  France 
Kisio Digital  France 
Trainline France 
Ministre Economie (Attache Transport) France 
transport.data.gouv.fr (Etalab) France 
transport.data.gouv.fr  France  
Datactivist France 
Travelspirit  UK 
DEFT153  UK 
Highways England  UK 
Arcadis  UK 
TFL  UK 
ODI Leeds  UK 
Transport Systems Catapult  UK 
Department for Transport  UK 
Ito World UK 
Birmingham City Council UK 
 
Open Data Institute 2018 | Case studyTransport data in the UK and France   26 