

The Use of 
Mobility 
Data for 
Responding 
to the 
COVID19 
Pandemic
DATA4COVID19 
Deep Dive

Acronyms and Abbreviations
CDR                                                                                    Call              Detail              Records
COVID-19                                                                      Coronavirus              disease              2019
CSR                                                                                    Corporate              Social              Responsibility
GDPR                                                                                    General              Data              Protection              Regulation
GPS                                                                                    Global              Positioning              System
ID                                                                                    Identification
ODM                                                                                    Origin-Destination              Matrix
NYC                                                                                    New              York              City
POI                                                                                    Point              of              Interest
SDK                                                                                    Software                            Development              Kit
SMS                                                                                    Short              Message              Service
Telcos                                                                      Telecommunications              company
UN                                                                                    United              Nations
UNICEF                                                                      United              Nations              Children’s              Fund
US                                                                                    United              States
x-DR                                                                                    x-Data              Record
1
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

1. Executive  Summary ..............................................................................3
2. Introduction ...........................................................................................4
1.A. Methodology ..................................................................................................7
1.B. Research  Limitations ...................................................................................10
3. Mobility Data: What It Is and How It Can Be Used ...........................10
2.A. Mobility Data Overview ...............................................................................11
2.B. Mobility Data for COVID-19  .......................................................................15
2.C. Users of Mobility Data.................................................................................15
2.D. Approaches to Leveraging Mobility Data: Data Collaboration ............17
4. Current Practice: Insights from Five Case Studies ........................20
3.A. Comparative  Insights  ..............................................................................20
3.B. Insights from Data Users............................................................................22
3.C. Insights from Data Suppliers ....................................................................25
5. Prescriptive Analysis: Recommendations for the Future ............28
6. About the Authors ................................................................................31
7. Appendix 1: Mobility Data Type .........................................................33
8. Appendix 2: Data4Covid Mobility Repository: Taxonomy of 
Factors, Design Choices, and Variables .............................................36
Table of Contents
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
2

1. Executive Summary
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to upend the way people move, work, and gather, governments, businesses, 
and public health researchers have looked increasingly at mobility data to support pandemic response. This data, 
assets that describe human location and movement, generally has been collected for purposes directly related to a 
company’s business model, including optimizing the delivery of consumer services, supply chain management or 
targeting advertisements. However, these call detail records, smartphone-mobility data, vehicle-derived GPS, and 
other mobility data assets can also be used to study patterns of movement. These patterns of movement have, in 
turn, been used by organizations to forecast disease spread and inform decisions on how to best manage activity in 
certain locations. 
Researchers at The GovLab and Cuebiq, supported by the Open Data Institute, identified 51 notable projects from 
around  the  globe  launched  by  public  sector  and  research  organizations  with  companies  that  use  mobility  data  
for  these  purposes.  It  curated  five  projects  among  this  listing  that  highlight  the  specific  opportunities  (and  risks)  
presented  by  using  this  asset.  Though  few  of  these  highlighted  projects  have  provided  public  outputs  that  make  
assessing  project  success  difficult,  organizations  interviewed  considered  mobility  data  to  be  a  useful  asset  that  
enabled  better  public  health  surveillance,  supported  existing  decision-making  processes,  or  otherwise  allowed  
groups to achieve their research goals. 
The report below summarizes some of the major points identified in those case studies. While acknowledging that 
location  data  can  be  a  highly  sensitive  data  type  that  can  facilitate  surveillance  or  expose  data  subjects  if  used  
carelessly, it finds mobility data can support research and inform decisions when applied toward narrowly defined 
research questions through frameworks that acknowledge and proactively mitigate risk. These frameworks can vary 
based on the individual circumstances facing data users, suppliers, and subjects. However, there are a few conditions 
that  can  enable  users  and  suppliers  to  promote  publicly  beneficial  and  responsible  data  use  and  overcome  the  
serious obstacles facing them.
For data users (governments and research institutions), functional access to real-time and contextually relevant data 
can support research goals, even though a lack of data science competencies and both short and long-term funding 
sources  represent  major  obstacles  for  this  goal.  Data  suppliers  (largely  companies),  meanwhile,  need  governance  
structures  and  mechanisms  that  facilitate  responsible  re-use,  including  data  re-use  agreements  that  define  who,  
what, where, and when, and under what conditions data can be shared. A lack of regulatory clarity and the absence 
of universal governance and privacy standards have impeded effective and responsible dissemination of mobility 
for  research  and  humanitarian  purposes.  Finally,  for  both  data  users  and  suppliers,  we  note  that  collaborative  
research networks that allow organizations to seek out and provide data can serve as enablers of project success by 
facilitating exchange of methods and resources, and closing the gap between research and practice. 
Based on these findings, we recommend the development of clear governance and privacy frameworks, increased 
capacity building around data use within the public sector, and more regular convenings of ecosystem stakeholders 
(including  the  public  and  data  subjects)  to  broaden  collaborative  networks.  We  also  propose  solutions  towards  
making the responsible use of mobility data more sustainable for long-term impact beyond the current pandemic. 
A failure to develop regulatory and governance frameworks that can responsibly manage mobility data could lead 
to a regression to the ad hoc and uncoordinated approaches that previously defined mobility data applications. It 
could also lead to disparate standards about organizations’ responsibilities to the public.  
3
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

2. Introduction
PHOTO: Unsplash/Dele Oke is licensed under CC0
With  over  120  million  cases  and  2.6  million  deaths  as  of  March  2021,  the  COVID-19  pandemic  continues  to  take  a  
catastrophic toll.
1
 With health care systems across the world under pressure, governments continue to limit the free 
movement  of  people  to  control  virus  spread.  Meanwhile,  people  continue  to  face  economic  and  social  hardship  
from  the  pandemic.  In  some  regions  that  successfully  controlled  the  pandemic,  additional  waves  of  spread  are  
forcing populations back into lockdown.
In addition to a relatively high fatality rate, COVID-19 is also easy to spread, with many of those infected spreading it to 
one or more people they know.
2
 These factors make understanding people’s interactions of the utmost importance. 
Traditionally,  understanding  connections  between  groups  has  been  done  by  public  health  professionals  through  
modeling  based  on  existing  epidemiological,  population,  and  statistically  derived  travel  data.
3
  Given  the  unique  
challenges  presented  by  COVID-19,  however,  some  governments  and  researchers  have  looked  toward  new  data  
sources to supplement existing approaches. 
One of these sources is mobility data, data about the location of a device passively produced through normal activity. 
Mobility data generally has been collected for purposes directly related to a company’s business model, including 
optimizing the delivery of consumer services or targeting advertisements. However, some professionals have used 
call detail records, smartphone- and vehicle-derived data, and other assets to understand in near-real time where 
and when disease spread is likely to occur.
4
 These insights can, in turn, inform official policies and help people make 
1.  The Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). “COVID-19 Map.” Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource 
Center. Accessed January 5, 2021. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
2.  Beech, Peter. “What Is COVID-19’s R Number – and Why Does It Matter?” World Economic Forum, May 8, 2020. https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/2020/05/covid-19-what-is-the-r-number/; Worldometer. “Coronavirus Death Rate (COVID-19) - Worldometer,” May 14, 2020. 
3.      https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6227252/ 
4.  Yates, Christian. “How to Model a Pandemic.” The Conversation. Accessed March 15, 2021. http://theconversation.com/how-to-model-a-
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
4

decisions about the individual contexts in which they operate.
Mobility insights and decision-support tools generated from de-identified and aggregated telecommunications and 
mobility data have already been used in response to public health threats such as Ebola in Africa,
5
 Zika in Brazil
6
 and 
swine flu in Mexico.
7
 The use of location data in each of these cases were broadly considered successful in addressing 
serious  and  immediate  public  needs.  However,  uses  of  location  data  have  also  been  used  for  more  questionable  
purposes. An investigation in the United States found one health smartphone app developed for North and South 
Dakota shared user data alongside “advertising identifiers” with other companies, despite the app’s privacy policy 
saying no such sharing would occur.
8
 In South Korea, poor security practices in a government-run health app made 
the names and real-time locations of quarantined individuals retrievable by hackers.
9
 In China, the New York Times 
reported that the government’s Alipay app secretly shared the user’s location and other information with police.
10
 In 
other contexts, companies that collect location data have reportedly sold their assets to law enforcement, military, 
and intelligence services without the knowledge or consent of users.
11
Incompetence and malice around the use of location data is a very real threat, as is the continued failure to hold bad 
actors accountable for irresponsible practices. With governments around the world currently engaged in large-scale 
efforts to use mobility data insights to help them manage the current COVID-19 crisis, it is crucial to encourage good 
practices and to foster regulatory clarity and institutional safeguards. Responsible, sustainable, and effective public 
health surveillance is only possible if organizations commit themselves to protecting the rights and well-being of 
data subjects. 
This report looks at several attempts by decision-makers in the public and private sector to engage with one another 
to  address  the  ongoing  crisis  to  see  what  promising  practices  exist.  Many  of  these  efforts  have  taken  the  form  of  
data collaboratives, a new form of public-private partnership in which participants from different sectors  exchange 
or  provide  access  to  expertise  and  data  to  create  public  value.
12
  By  mapping  and  studying  these  mobility  data  
collaboratives, we seek to identify what makes a successful initiative and what does not. This work can be used not 
only to inform ongoing response and recovery efforts but to improve how institutions operate in a post-pandemic 
environment.  It  can  support  work  to  make  data  collaboration  as  a  whole  more  responsible,  sustainable,  and  
systematic. From this basis, we approach the analysis by asking:
• 
What are possible conditions for success and failure of mobility data sharing initiatives within the context of 
COV ID -19?
• 
What  are  the  barriers  and  challenges  to  successful  implementation  and  outcomes?  What  are  the  risks  
involved? Are they unique to mobility data or indicative of data sharing partnerships in general? 
• 
What  tangible  effects  or  impacts  have  there  been  from  sharing,  or  not  sharing,  between  the  public  and  
private sectors? 
• 
What decision-making has been made possible from these sectors successfully sharing their mobility data?
pandemic-134187.
5.  Wesolowski, Amy, Caroline O. Buckee, Linus Bengtsson, Erik Wetter, Xin Lu, and Andrew J. Tatem. “Commentary: Containing the Ebola 
Outbreak - the Potential and Challenge of Mobile Network Data.” PLoS Currents 6 (September 29, 2014). https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.out-
breaks.0177e7fcf52217b8b634376e2f3efc5e.
6.  Peiró, Patricia. “Los billetes de avión predicen dónde viajan las enfermedades.” El País. November 1, 2018, sec. Planeta Futuro. ht tps: //e l-
pais.com/elpais/2018/10/29/planeta_futuro/1540825274_349206.html.
7.  Oliver, Nuria. “Combating Global Epidemics with Big Mobile Data.” the Guardian, September 5, 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/me-
dia-network/media-network-blog/2013/sep/05/combating-epidemics-big-mobile-data.
8.  Fowler, Geoffrey A. “One of the First Contact-Tracing Apps Violates Its Own Privacy Policy.” Washington Post, May 21, 2020, sec. Perspective. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/05/21/care19-dakota-privacy-coronavirus/.
9.  Sang-Hun, Choe, Aaron Krolik, Raymond Zhong, and Natasha Singer. “Major Security Flaws Found in South Korea Quarantine App.” The 
New York Times, July 21, 2020, sec. Technology. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/21/technology/korea-coronavirus-app-security.html.
10.  Mozur, Paul, Raymond Zhong, and Aaron Krolik. “In Coronavirus Fight, China Gives Citizens a Color Code, With Red Flags.” The New York 
Times, March 2, 2020, sec. Business. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html.
11.   Cox, Joseph. “Military Unit That Conducts Drone Strikes Bought Location Data From Ordinary Apps,” March 4, 2021. https://www.vice.com/
en/article/y3g97x/location-data-apps-drone-strikes-iowa-national-guard.
12 .  Data Collaboratives. “Data Collaboratives Home Page,” 2018. http://datacollaboratives.org/explorer.html.
5
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

• 
What are the prospects for sustained mobility data sharing programs in a post COVID-19 world? 
2.A. Methodology
To answer these research questions, the Open Data Institute supported a research team composed of researchers from 
The GovLab and Cuebiq to assemble a repository of mobility data collaboratives related to COVID-19 and describe 
key attributes of each initiative. This mobility-focused repository stemmed from The GovLab’s ongoing curation and 
review of data collaboratives for COVID-19 through its the #Data4COVID19 Living Repository.
13
 Researchers sourced 
this sample of mobility data collaboratives through an analysis of this repository as well as additional desk research 
and expert consultations. 
While The GovLab assembled most of the examples through desk research, subject-matter experts in mobility data 
from Cuebiq captured key attributes of these data collaboratives—including the type of mobility data shared and 
technical means for ensuring responsible data use. Once the research team compiled the repository, it selected five 
data  collaboratives  in  coordination  with  the  Open  Data  Institute  to  study  further.  These  selections  sought,  to  the  
extent  possible,  to  explore  projects  across  different  regions  that  used  different  data  collaborative  types,  project  
scopes, and data types. The team did, however, decide only to pursue those projects where substantial supporting 
documentation was available and where it would be possible to secure interviews with key stakeholders. 
13.  Originally launched in March 2019, the crowdsourced repository features, at the time of writing, over 200 global examples of data collabo-
ratives initiated to address the COVID-19 pandemic. See http://list.data4covid19.org 
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
6

7
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

By synthesizing insights gleaned from the detailed case studies and the broader repository, we provide a view into 
the current state of mobility data collaboratives for COVID-19 response while also identifying conditions for success 
and obstacles to achieving impact. Based on this diagnosis, we provide recommendations towards enabling more 
systematic, sustainable and responsible models of reuse of mobility data through data collaboration as to support 
decision-making  regarding  pandemic  prevention,  monitoring,  and  response.
14
  This  document  summarizes  the  
results of that work. It includes several sections:
• 
Section  II  of  this  document  provides  an  introduction  to  mobility  data,  the  value  and  characteristics  of  
this data as it relates to COVID-19, and the organization of our Mobility Data for COVID-19 repository. It also 
includes  a  brief  explanation  of  data  collaboration,  the  structure  through  which  the  data  described  in  this  
document is shared. 
• 
In Section III, we provide a diagnostic analysis of the contents of the Mobility Data for COVID-19 repository 
and the five case studies that were subject to in-depth analysis. These projects include: 
• Facebook Data for Good;
• The European Commission Joint Research Centre’s Mobility Functional Area Study;
14.  Data Collaboratives. “Data Collaboratives Home Page,” 2018. http://datacollaboratives.org/explorer.html.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
8

• The Greater London Authority Data Store’s COVID-19 Mobility Report;
• Telefónica Chile and Universidad del Desarrollo Mobility Reports; and
• The University of Toronto’s Canadian Mobility Analysis. 
We detail insights that can be gleaned from these insights for demand-side actors, those who need data for 
analysis and supply-side actors, those who provide data.
• 
Section IV provides a prescriptive analysis, including an overview of enabling factors and preconditions of 
success.  It  also  includes  recommendations  for  improving  current  practice  regarding  COVID-19  and  a  set  of  
recommendations for the field of data. collaboration more generally.
15
2.B. Research Limitations
The following report, associated case studies, and repository rely on desk research and key stakeholder interviews. 
This approach represents a few limitations that readers should keep in mind. First, the reliance on public reporting 
means  that  the  projects  highlighted  here  are  not  comprehensive  and,  in  some  way,  self-selected.  The  COVID-19  
pandemic has generated a large number of data-driven initiatives, some of them well-known and others secretive. 
Both public and private sector entities have an incentive only to share information about projects that they consider 
clearly successful, meaning many projects with negative or ambiguous results are simply never reported by those who 
create them. Second, the frequent lack of tangible outputs, transparent processes, or third party involvement means 
that, in many of the examples highlighted, the team is reliant on how project sponsors characterize their own work 
and the work of their partners. While the research team sought documentation to validate these characterizations 
wherever  possible  and  sought  out  multiple  interviewees  to  get  multiple  perspectives  on  the  assembled  projects,  
researchers recognize the inherent limitations here.
The research team also recognizes the potential conflict of interest represented by the involvement of researchers 
from  Cuebiq,  a  provider  of  mobility  data  and  a  participant  in  several  of  the  projects  listed.  To  promote  research  
independence,  the  research  team  explicitly  excluded  Cuebiq  staff  from  drafting  and  editing  case  studies  on  any  
projects Cuebiq was directly involved in. Recognizing the possibility of implicit bias—Cuebiq’s involvement shaping 
the team’s characterization of Cuebiq and its competitors—the reports clearly indicate Cuebiq’s involvement in the 
overall effort wherever appropriate.  
15.  We acknowledge that the insights and recommendations detailed in section III and IV may not be applicable across all contexts, especially 
those in which mobile phone or other advanced data collection strategies may not be possible e.g. conflict zones, countries with low human 
development indices, etc.
9
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

3. Mobility Data: What It Is and 
How It Can Be Used
For the past decade researchers have used location data derived from mobile phones to analyze human mobility 
dynamics.  The  insights  generated  from  mobility  data  informs  many  topics,  including  transportation  and  urban  
planning, emergency management, and disease surveillance.
16
 Such data is collected by private sector entities such 
as telecommunication companies (telcos) through Call Detail Records (CDRs) or through smartphone applications 
that use mobile phones’ built-in GPS capabilities. While private sector mobility data is primarily monetized through 
commercial  activities  related  to  advertising  and  analytics,  some  location  data  companies  and  telcos  also  provide  
access to mobility datasets for academic research and humanitarian purposes. 
As with many types of emerging technologies, the use of location data in the private and academic realms serves 
as  testing  grounds  for  concepts  that  can  later  be  adopted  for  public  use.  One  notable  example  of  this  is  the  US  
Department of Transportation’s use of Google’s mobility analytics for improving public transportation, which helps 
cities understand “where citizens want to travel and how to transport them to those destinations more efficiently, 
fairly, and safely.”
17
 Another example is the United Nations’ use of CDRs from Turk Telekom to assess social integration 
of  refugees  in  Turkey;  the  UN  created  a  methodological  framework  which  allowed  public  sector  organizations  to  
16.  Frias-Martinez, E., G. Williamson, and V. Frias-Martinez. “An Agent-Based Model of Epidemic Spread Using Human Mobility and Social 
Network Information.” In 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2011 IEEE Third International Conference 
on Social Computing, 57–64, 2011. https://doi.org/10.1109/PASSAT/SocialCom.2011.142; Wang, Feilong, Xiangyang Guan, and Cynthia Chen. 
“Assessing Impacts of Abnormal Events on Travel Patterns Leveraging Passively Collected Trajectory Data.” A r X i v :1911.116 3 3   [ P h y s i c s ], March 29, 
2020. http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.11633. 
Wang, H., F. Calabrese, G. Di Lorenzo, and C. Ratti. “Transportation Mode Inference from Anonymized and Aggregated Mobile Phone 
Call Detail Records.” In 13th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 318 –23, 2010. ht tps://doi.org/10.1109/
ITSC . 2010. 5625188.
17.   TechCrunch. “US DOT and Alphabet’s Sidewalk Labs Aim to Create New Public Transit and Wi-Fi Networks.” Accessed January 5, 2021. 
https://social.techcrunch.com/2016/03/17/u-s-dot-and-sidewalk-labs-hustle-and-flow/.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
10

assess the impacts of relief programs and the social, economic, and cultural burden placed on refugees.
18
 
While mobility data holds the potential to create positive social impact through cases such as these, it can also be 
used for ethically problematic purposes. For instance, in early 2020, some reports alleged that one Muslim prayer 
app  collected  location  data  that  fed  into  counterterrorism  operations  by  the  US  military.
19
  In  countries  with  social  
and  political  unrest,  the  mis-use  of  mobility  data  can  endanger  citizens  or  asylum-seekers,  for  whom  information  
about their whereabouts is particularly sensitive. Recent research has shown that location data is a key part of the 
extension of the “surveillance state.”
20
 Given the privacy sensitivities inherent in the mass collection of location data, 
it is critical to evaluate the mechanisms by which data is collected and shared in order to weigh utility against (group) 
privacy. 
In addition to privacy concerns, it should also be noted that mobility data alone is not a panacea, and certain types 
of mobility data may under-represent segments of society due to the collection method. For example, mobility data 
derived from smartphones may under-represent those with lower rates of smartphone ownership, such as elderly 
populations and lower-income groups, especially in countries with overall lower smartphone penetration.
21
When COVID-19 emerged as a global health threat in early 2020, epidemiologists across research institutions and the 
public sector alike (in areas where resources for such analyses exist) turned to mobility data as a source for situational 
awareness to inform containment strategies. For instance, countries such as South Korea used smartphone-derived 
location  data  for  surveillance  activities  related  to  contact  tracing  while  companies  such  as  Google  and  Apple  
developed technologies for bluetooth-enabled contact tracing.
22
 
3.A. Mobility Data Overview
There are many mobility data sources and formats, each relying on different technologies and collection mechanisms. 
The type of location data used for COVID-19 mobility modeling is often derived from private sector sources such as 
telecommunications and smartphone app developers. However, it can also be sourced from public sector sources, 
such as public transportation authorities who can provide sensor or ridership data. Data provenance is an important 
factor that affects all “Five V’s” of big data, detailed here as they relate to mobility data: 
• 
Volume: the scale of data being collected both in terms of number of users and records per user; 
• 
Veracity: the spatial precision and accuracy of data being collected;
• 
Value: the relevance of the data to the use case at hand;
• 
Velocity: the rate at which data is collected and delivered to the user; and
• 
Variety: the diversity of metadata being collected.
18.  Pulse Lab New York. “Using Call Detail Records To Understand Refugee Integration In Turkey • UN Global Pulse.” UN Global Pulse (blog), 
2018. https://www.unglobalpulse.org/project/using-call-detail-records-to-understand-refugee-integration-in-turkey-2/.
19.  Cox, Joseph. “How the U.S. Military Buys Location Data from Ordinary Apps.” November 2020. https://www.vice.com/en/article/jgqm5x/
us-military-location-data-xmode-locate-x.
20.  Frith, Jordan and Michael Saker. “It Is All About Location: Smartphones and Tracking the Spread of COVID-19.” July 30, 2020. ht tps: //doi.
org/10.1177/2056305120948257
21.  Pew Research Center. “Mobile Fact Sheet.” Internet & Technology (blog), June 12, 2019. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/
mobile/.
22.  Hsu, Jeremy. “Contact Tracing Apps Struggle to Be Both Effective and Private - IEEE Spectrum.” IEEE Spectrum, September 24, 2020. ht tps: //
spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/devices/contact-tracing-apps-struggle-to-be-both-effective-and-private.
11
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

In addition to the “five V’s” are the ethical implications of both how the data is collected and how it is shared. Did the 
data collector obtain the informed consent of the user? If so, does the data collector enable users to exercise their 
data rights in accordance with regulations such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)? 
How  does  the  data  controller  safeguard  the  privacy  of  individual  users?  These  ethical  concerns  are  of  paramount  
importance, especially in countries where regulations around appropriate use often do not exist.
Below, we seek to provide clarity on all these issues. We provide a high-level overview of the types of mobility data 
that  are  used  for  COVID-19  analyses.  (A  more  detailed  technical  description  of  each  source  can  be  found  in  the  
Appendix.) We also provide descriptions and terminology of data provenance in terms of ethical considerations—
such as consent—and technical measures taken to preserve privacy. 
An Emerging Taxonomy of Mobility Data
Data on mobility can be collected through various methods. Several notable sources of mobility data include:
1. Call  Detail  Records  (CDR):  Passively  collected  records  of  each  time  a  mobile  phone  connects  to  a  
network by sending or receiving a voice call or SMS.
23
 CDR generally benefits from a large scale of users, albeit 
with less accuracy than GPS data. 
2. x-Data  Record  (x-DR):  Any  type  of  data  created  when  a  mobile  phone  user  connects  to  a  mobile  
network.
24
  Like  CDR,  x-DR  generally  benefits  from  a  large  scale  of  users,  albeit  with  less  accuracy  than  GPS  
data. 
3. First-Party  SDK  smartphone-derived  GPS:  Data  transmitted  on  the  geographic  location  of  a  
smartphone using the device’s built-in sensor. “First Party” implies the data holder collects data directly from 
individual users through a single collection methodology. 
4. Third-Party  SDK  smartphone-derived  GPS:  Data  transmitted  on  the  geographic  location  of  a  
smartphone  by  an  application  using  the  device’s  built-in  sensor.  “Third  party”  implies  that  the  data  holder  
23.  Jones, Kerina Helen, Helen Daniels, Sharon Heys, and David Vincent Ford. “Public Views on Using Mobile Phone Call Detail Records in 
Health Research: Qualitative Study.” JMIR MHealth and UHealth 7, no. 1 (January 16, 2019). https://doi.org/10.2196/11730.
24.  Blackburn, Mandy. “Guide to Useful Telecoms Risk Assurance Acronyms and Terms.” Risk Assurance Group, 2017. https://riskandassurance-
group.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Generic-Guide-to-useful-Telecoms-Acronyms.pdf.
Veracity
Value
Velocity
Variety
Volume
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
12

obtains data from various third-party sources, and therefore lacks a direct relationship with users and requires 
data cleansing. 
5. BidStream  Data: Data  about  a  potential  recipient  of  a  digital  advertisement,  including  device  
identifiers and cookies, location data, IP address, and unique demographic and biometric information, by the 
organizations bidding to place an ad.
25
 BidStream data is less precise than other sources. It also does not allow 
for longitudinal analyses, and presents ethical concerns since users have no way of opting in or out from data 
collection. 
6. Wearable GPS: Data  derived  from  wearable  sensors—connected  to  the  internet  of  things—that  log  
the user’s physical location.
7.   Aerial: Aerial  mobility  data  refers  to  data  collected  about  physical  movements  of  people  based  on  
images derived from aerial photography, often taken from satellites.
26
8. Vehicle GPS: Data transmitted on the geographic location of a vehicle—such as an automobile, ship, or 
airplane—through in-vehicle sensors or other devices.
9. Bluetooth: A signal that allows for short-range wireless communication between electronic devices that 
can be used to determine when objects come into proximity with each other.
27
10. Geotagged social media data: Metadata connected to videos, photographs, messages, and other 
content posted on social media containing information on the time and geographic location of the user.
28
Consent path
Consent  paths  refer  to  the  extent  to  which  users  of  different  technologies  can  consent  to  data  collection.  
Governments, companies, and other stakeholders have control and responsibility for setting these practices.
• 
Opt-in/Opt-out: The  concept  of  “opt-in”  refers  to  an  application,  platform,  or  tool  that  allows  users  to  
consent to data collection. Consent is defined as “freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous” given by 
“clear and affirmative action.”
29
 The concept of “opt-out” refers to the ability of a user to exercise their rights to 
discontinue collection of their data. In addition to requiring that data collectors obtain consent to collect data 
from users, the European Union’s GDPR gives users the right to “portability” and “erasure.” Portability allows 
for users to request copies of their data while erasure, “the right to be forgotten,” can allow users to demand 
that their data be permanently deleted.
30
 
• 
Opt-out  only:  “Opt-out  only”  refers  to  an  application,  platform,  or  tool  that  collects  data  from  users  by  
default without first obtaining consent. Such policies only allow users to opt-out if they manually navigate to 
the system’s settings and manually withdraw consent for such practices.
25.  Wyden, Ron, Maria Cantwell, Elizabeth Warren, Anna Eshoo, Yvette Clarke, Bill Cassidy, Sherrod Brown, Edward Markey, Zoe Lofgren, and 
Ro Khanna. “Letter to the Honorable Joseph J. Simons, Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission,” July 31, 2020. https://www.wyden.senate.
gov/imo/media/doc/073120%20Wyden%20Cassidy%20Led%20FTC%20Investigation%20letter.pdf.
26.  US Geological Survey. “National Geospatial Program.” Accessed January 5, 2021. https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nation-
al-geospatial-program/imagery.
2 7.   Figliola, Patricia Moloney. “Digital Contact Tracing Technology: Overview and Considerations for Implementation.” Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service, May 29, 2020. https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/2020-05-29_IF11559_f93c95d9673977192f24c0c149cbe-
28ca7f20e50.pdf.
28.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0261517716301005?casa_token=tLhh5zlgjhkAAAAA:tW51e5tF-juTplhzBx-
kuHsw2-1h79w-lFp_IHBBDh4cN_vaM5CGVd7zx2-uEr8tInGLnz-c 
29.  Heimes. “How Opt-in Consent Really Works,” February 22, 2019. https://iapp.org/news/a/yes-how-opt-in-consent-really-works/.
30.  Individuals subject to the GDPR and similar laws have the right to request to be forgotten. However, this right of individuals to request 
removal of their data may not apply to large and anonymized databases where personal identifiers have been already removed. In Decem-
ber 2018, the Austrian Data Protection Authority ruled that anonymizing personal information satisfied the erasure requirement so long as 
neither the data controller nor a third party can “restore a personal reference without disproportionate effort.” See: Marko, Roland, and Iris 
Riepan. “Austrian GDPR-Tracker: Data Protection Authority On Erasure By Way Of Anonymization - Privacy - Austria.” Mondaq, February 11, 
2019. https://www.mondaq.com/austria/data-protection/780272/austrian-gdpr-tracker-data-protection-authority-on-erasure-by-way-of-an-
onymization.
13
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

• 
No  explicit  opt-in  or  opt-out:  A  platform  with  no  explicit  opt-in  or  opt-out  procedures  is  one  that  
intentionally or unintentionally hides whether the app is collecting data on the user. Most jurisdictions require 
organizations to inform users whether their data is being collected.
Technical privacy measures
Since  human  mobility  data  is  derived  from  inferring  the  locations  and  mobility  of  individual  people,  there  are  
privacy issues inherent in using mobility data, no matter the intention of the analysis. Even when a mobility data has 
been provided with the informed consent of a user who also has full control over their data rights, data controllers 
must apply technical measures to the dataset to preserve the privacy of underlying users. The following examples 
demonstrate  a  range  of  techniques  to  preserve  privacy,  with  varying  degrees  of  privacy  protection  versus  data  
utility. 
De-identified: Many  mobility  data  sources  are  collected  from  individual  users  with  a  unique  identifier,  such  
as  a  customer  ID  for  CDRs  or  a  mobile  advertising  ID  for  SDK-derived  GPS  data.  While  anonymizing  these  unique  
identifiers  is  an  important  step  towards  protecting  privacy,  anonymization  alone  has  been  proven  to  be  an  
insufficient measure, since downstream users can attempt to re-identify individual users by combining multiple data 
sources, such as public home address records.
31
 Since anonymized records alone are not necessarily aggregated, it 
may require significant data science and computational resources to process unaggregated anonymized mobility 
data. 
De-identified with differential privacy: To preserve the utility of granular location data while taking a more 
robust approach than simple anonymization, data collectors can also apply various differential privacy techniques 
to individual data records, such as adding “noise” by modifying the latitude and longitude points and coarsening 
the level of accuracy within location data records. Additional measures include regularly shuffling anonymized IDs, 
removing sensitive points of interest from datasets, and obfuscating identifiable locations such as home locations 
to preclude attempts at re-identification.
32
Aggregated: One  of  the  most  straightforward  and  effective  methods  for  preserving  privacy  is  through  
aggregation—the  combining  of  multiple  location  data  records  into  high  level  statistics.
33
  Within  the  realm  of  
mobility  data  for  COVID-19,  aggregation  is  often  used  to  measure  trends  such  as  median  distance  traveled  by  all  
users within a given area, such as a county. In addition to preserving privacy, aggregated data has the added benefit 
in some instances of more easily fitting into pre-built epidemiological models. One potential downside is that once 
data is aggregated, it can be difficult to perform more fine-grained analyses. 
On-premise federated: To avoid trade-offs between privacy preservation and the utility of granular analyses, 
data  providers  can  offer  sandbox  environments  that  allow  users  to  submit  queries  to  datasets  that  remain  on  
premise with the data provider. Upon submitting queries to the data provider, the user receives aggregated datasets 
in return. While users of such platforms require a higher degree of proficiency in data science, such a model provides 
the privacy preservation of aggregated data with a greater degree of customization and flexibility.
34
Synthetic Mobility data: Another approach to benefit from the use of granular location data while protecting 
privacy  is  to  develop  synthetic  mobility  datasets.  A  synthetic  data  is  identical  in  structure  to  a  real-world  dataset,  
but it is generated by mimicking the statistical distributions of a real dataset, without being linked to any individual  
user-generated  data.  One  drawback  of  synthetic  datasets  for  mobility  is  that  it  requires  sophisticated  machine  
learning technology to generate usable datasets.
35
31.  Montjoye, Yves-Alexandre de, Sébastien Gambs, Vincent Blondel, Geoffrey Canright, Nicolas de Cordes, Sébastien Deletaille, Kenth 
Engø-Monsen, et al. “On the Privacy-Conscientious Use of Mobile Phone Data.” Scientific Data 5, no. 1 (December 11, 2018): 180286. ht tps: //doi.
org/10.1038/sdata.2018.286.
32.  ElSalamouny, Ehab, and Sebastien Gambs. “Differential Privacy Models for Location- Based Services,” 2016, 34.
33.  Kissner, Lea. “Aggregating over Anonymized Data,” June 25, 2019. https://iapp.org/news/a/aggregating-over-anonymized-data/.
34.  Montjoye, Yves-Alexandre de, Erez Shmueli, Samuel S. Wang, and Alex Sandy Pentland. “OpenPDS: Protecting the Privacy of Metadata 
through SafeAnswers.” Edited by Tobias Preis. PLoS ONE 9, no. 7 (July 9, 2014): e98790. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0098790.
35.  El Emam, Khaled. “Accelerating AI with Synthetic Data.” IAPP. Privacy Tech (blog), February 26, 2020. https://iapp.org/news/a/accelerat-
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
14

3.B. Mobility Data for COVID-19 
Just as there are many types of data sources and formats, so too are there many ways mobility data can be used. 
For  the  purpose  of  this  report,  we  examine  mobility  data  collaboratives  developed  in  response  to  the  pandemic  
that  focus  on  using  data  for  gaining  population-level  insights  into  evolving  mobility  dynamics.  Within  this  realm,  
mobility data has been used for a variety of analyses to ask questions and glean metrics including, for instance:
• 
Average distance traveled by area: How much are people moving and traveling now as compared 
to pre-pandemic times? 
• 
Origin-Destination between places: What places do people travel to and from, and how can we use 
this information to model disease spread? 
• 
Proximity networks and social mixing: How often are people coming into close proximity with each 
other, and what does this mean for transmissibility? 
• 
Point of interest visitation: What types of places are people visiting more or less, and what impact does 
this have on the economy as well as potential for disease spread?
• 
Mass  migration  and  relocation  patterns:  Are  people  leaving  cities  for  more  suburban  and  rural  
areas? 
• 
Quarantine adherence: What percentage of the population is staying home during lockdowns? 
• 
Mobility inequality: How might mobility and quarantine patterns differ between high and low income 
segments?  
• 
Spread forecasting: How can we use all of these variables to forecast the spread of infectious disease?
36
Through  our  research,  alone,  we  developed  a  living  repository  representing  a  diverse  array  of  data  collaboratives  
featuring:
• 
51 Unique Data Collaboratives
• 
36 Unique Data Providers 
• 
136 Countries
3.C. Users of Mobility Data
While  the  composition  of  each  mobility  data  collaborative  is  unique,  there  are  common  trends  around  the  needs  
of various data users and the type of mobility data provided by different data suppliers. As developed by the Open 
Data Institute, data users on the demand side can be categorized into four general user personae.
37
 While any type of 
data user can unintentionally misuse data, these user types below do not include individuals seeking to intentionally 
pursue inappropriate uses of mobility data.
Researchers: Whether  working  within  government  agencies,  the  humanitarian  sector,  universities  or  private  
research institutions, researchers using mobility data typically have advanced expertise in data science, and are often 
motivated to develop novel approaches to working with data or applications for using mobility data. Researchers 
often  require  rich,  granular  datasets,  and  also  benefit  from  historical  data  to  perform  longitudinal  studies.  An  
ing-ai-with-synthetic-data/.
36.  Oliver et al, supra n o t e   7.
37.   Knowledge & Opinion. “Covid-19 Mobility Data User Personas – The ODI.” Open Data Institute, September 28, 2020. https://theodi.org/
article/covid-19-mobility-data-user-personas/.
15
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

example  of  a  “researcher”  user  persona  can  be  found  in  our  repository,  and  detailed  case  study  on  the  COVID-19  
Mobility Data Network, in which researchers from Harvard University and other institutions used mobility data from 
Facebook and Camber Systems for a variety of COVID-19 research topics.
38
Local government workers: Local government workers are at the forefront of COVID-19 response within their 
local communities. Whether they work in small towns or large metropolitan areas, these users require mobility data 
that is localized and relevant to their communities. Local government workers also require more aggregated, user-
friendly  datasets,  especially  within  smaller  communities,  which  may  not  have  data  scientists  as  part  of  their  staff.  
An example of local government workers leveraging mobility data that can be found in our repository is New York 
City’s Recovery Data Partnership, in which local officials use aggregated mobility data from Safegraph, Foursquare, 
and Cuebiq to inform local decision making related to COVID-19.
39
 (Editor’s Note: Cuebiq is an author of this report.) 
Public  health  policy  officials:  To  create  effective  policies  aimed  at  curbing  the  spread  of  COVID-19  and  
flattening  the  curve  of  caseloads,  public  health  policy  officials  require  situational  awareness  into  macro  trends  
of  how  people  are  moving  between  places,  such  as  counties  or  cities.  These  users  generally  require  aggregated  
datasets that can be readily standardized and incorporated into existing models, such as epidemiological models. 
An example public health policy officials using mobility data in this manner can be found within the Informes de 
Movilidad data collaborative in Chile, in which data from Telefonica Chile was aggregated into nation-wide mobility 
reports used by various agencies within the government of Chile. 
Journalists: With  the  primary  objective  of  informing  the  public,  journalists  use  mobility  data  to  provide  easily  
digestible  information  on  mobility  trends  through  data  journalism  reporting  that  often  includes  statistics  and  
interactive  visualizations.  Journalists  tend  to  be  generalists  and  therefore  require  user-friendly  and  generalizable  
datasets that have the potential to tell a story that is easily understood. Data journalists also benefit from frequently 
updated datasets so they can inform the public as the nature of the pandemic and its effects continue to evolve. 
38. COVID-19 Mobility Data Network. “COVID-19 Mobility Data Network.” COVID-19 Mobility Data Network, 2020. https://www.covid19mobili-
ty.org/.
39.  NYC Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics. “Recovery Data Partnership.” NYC.gov, 2020. https://www1.nyc.gov/site/analytics/initiatives/recov-
ery-data-partnership.page.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
16

3.D. Approaches to Leveraging Mobility Data: Data 
Collaboration
What Are Data Collaboratives?
Data collaboratives are an emerging form of collaboration in which data or data expertise held by an entity in the 
private sector is leveraged in partnership with another entity (from the public sector, civil society, and/or academia) 
for  public  good.  Data  collaboratives  draw  together  otherwise  siloed  data  and  a  dispersed  range  of  expertise,  
matching supply and demand and ensuring that relevant institutions and individuals are using and analyzing data 
in ways that maximize the possibility of new, innovative social solutions.
40
Data collaboratives can be structured in many different ways but generally tend to involve one or more data holders 
from  the  private  sector  who  can  provide  data  (supply-side  actors)  and  one  or  more  actors  working  in  the  public  
sector, civil society, or academia that seek to use data in the public interest (demand-side actors). When designed 
well, supply- and demand-side actors come together based on a clear problem definition or organizing question; 
determine  a  fit-for-purpose  operational  model  for  providing  functional  access  to  data;  enshrine  a  governance  
framework and any necessary legal documentation to organize decision-making, ensure accountability, and mitigate 
risks; and co-create a tactical roadmap for collaboratively moving from data to insight to action.
41
40. Verhulst, Stefaan, Andrew Young, Michelle Winowatan, and Andrew J. Zahuranec. “Leveraging Private Data for Public Good: A Descriptive 
Analysis and Typology of Existing Practices.” Brooklyn, New York: The GovLab, October 2019. http://datacollaboratives.org/existing-practices.
html.
41.  Verhulst, Stefaan, and Andrew J. Zahuranec. “Using Data for COVID-19 Requires New and Innovative Governance Approaches.” Data & 
Policy (blog), May 21, 2020. https://medium.com/data-policy/using-data-for-covid-19-requires-new-and-innovative-governance-approaches-
6c1350d9a2f2.
17
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

Typology of Data Collaboration
The  GovLab  introduced  a  typology  of  data  collaboratives  in  2019  informed  by  an  analysis  of  over  100  projects  
from  around  the  world  included  in  the  Data  Collaboratives  Explorer.
42
  Two  key  variables  formed  the  basis  of  the  
typology: 1) the level of engagement between data supply and data demand actors; and 2) the accessibility or level 
of conditionality of accessing data by external parties. 
Table 1: Data Collaboratives Matrix of Engagement and Accessibility
Current practice in the use of mobility data to address COVID-19 largely aligns with the general data collaboratives 
typology. Mobility data collaboratives in our sample clustered into six broad categories (in order of prevalence in 
our sample): 
• 
Intelligence Generation: Companies internally develop data-driven analyses, tools, and other resources, 
and release those insights to the broader public. There are 12 intelligence generation data collaboratives in 
the sample.
• Example: Using data provided by the Chinese search engine Baidu, this project measures the 
effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in response to COVID-19 across China.
43
 It 
analyzed first-party data capturing movement within and outside of cities, proximity and contact 
patterns, and the timeliness of disease reporting to construct daily travel networks and simulate 
likely outbreak scenarios. It then made these models, but not the underlying data, available to inform 
research and public decision-making.
• 
Research  and  Analysis  Partnership:  Companies  engage  directly  with  public  sector  partners  and  
share  certain  proprietary  data  assets  to  generate  new  knowledge  with  public  value.  There  are  20  research  
and analysis partnership data collaboratives in the sample.
• Example: The COVID-19 Mobility Project is an effort from the Robert Koch Institute and Humboldt 
University of Berlin to use telecom data from the Deutsche Telekom (distributed by the company 
Motionlogic) and Telefónica (analyzed and aggregated by the mobility data company Teralytics) to 
improve understanding of changes in mobility throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
44
 The project 
maintains a “mobility monitor” which displays daily changes in the number of trips across Germany 
from March onward. It also produces reports describing major findings following notable changes.
• 
Public  Interface:  Companies  provide  open  access  to  certain  data  assets,  enabling  independent  uses  of  
the data by external parties. There are nine public interface data collaboratives in the sample.
42.  The Explorer features over 200 data collaboratives as of December 2020. https://datacollaboratives.org/explorer.html  
43.  Lai, Shengjie, Nick W. Ruktanonchai, Liangcai Zhou, Olivia Prosper, Wei Luo, Jessica R. Floyd, Amy Wesolowski, et al. “Effect of Non-Phar-
maceutical Interventions to Contain COVID-19 in China.” Nature 585, no. 7825 (September 17, 2020): 410–13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
020 -2293-x.
44. Robert Koch Institute & Humboldt University of Berlin. “Covid-19 Mobility Project.” Covid-19 Mobility Project, 2020. https://www.
covid-19-mobility.org/.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
18

• Example:  For  its  COVID-19  Data  Consortium,
45
  Safegraph  has  aggregated  foot  traffic  data  in  North  
America, with over 6 million points of interest (POI) across the country. This dashboard visualizes the 
impact the pandemic has had on the US economy and daily life by comparing data from recent months 
on commercial activity (foot traffic data) to that of previous years.
• 
Trusted  Intermediary:  Third-party  actors,  such  as  non-profit  organizations  or  humanitarian  agencies,  
support  collaboration  between  private  sector  data  providers  and  data  users  from  the  public  sector,  civil  
society, or academia. There are three trusted intermediary data collaboratives in the sample. 
• Example: Flowminder, a data analytics nonprofit, partnered with Ghana Statistical Services to analyze 
de-identified and aggregated CDRs provided by Vodafone.
46
 The effort is aimed at identifying where 
mobility  restrictions  instituted  by  the  government  are  being  adhered  to  on  a  district,  regional,  and  
national level.
• 
Data Pooling: Companies and other data holders agree to create a unified presentation of datasets as a 
collection accessible by multiple parties. There are six data pooling data collaboratives in the sample. 
• Example: UNICEF, through its big data platform Magic Box, is working to measure the secondary effects 
of  COVID-19  and  response  efforts,  to  understand  the  impacts  on  social  behavior,  education,  critical  
supplies, sentiment, opinion, and vulnerable populations. It includes data on the “timely monitoring 
of  physical  distancing,  evidence  on  the  suitability  and  sustainability  of  mobility  reductions  for  low  
income settings, and better models that allow a better understanding and balancing of the potential 
impact of these measures on the disease as well as on the underlying communities.”
47
• 
Challenge Prize: Companies make data available to participants who compete to develop apps; answer 
problem statements; test hypotheses and premises; or pioneer innovative uses of data for the public interest 
and to provide business value. There are two challenge prize data collaboratives in the sample.
• Example: The #MOVID19 Hackathon was a competition hosted by Datasketch, a data, software, and 
mapping business, the New Urban Mobility Alliance, a global technology and mobility organization, 
and several other local civic organizations.
48
 The challenge asked participants to develop innovative 
analyses  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  Bogotá’s  quarantine.  Participants  used  open  mobility  data  
from city transit authorities from the sponsor organizations hosted on Github. 44 people contributed, 
with three projects awarded small cash prizes. These projects included a digital tool to reroute transit 
and an effort to identify which clinics needed more mobility options. 
Challenge prizes are the least prevalent collaborative type in our extensive but not comprehensive sample 
based  on  research  conducted  in  English  exclusively.  We  speculate  this  disparity  could  be  the  result  of  
difficulties in balancing the utility of mobility data (and thus its sensitivity) and the protections required to 
make it accessible to distributed challenge participants as there are many examples of challenge prizes in The 
GovLab’s  Data  Collaboratives  Explorer,  which  collects  projects  beyond  the  context  of  the  pandemic.
49
  This  
disparity could be a signal that the difficulties of making mobility available to challenge participants can be 
navigated, but that could require a longer lead time than would be workable for rapidly emerging situations 
such as the COVID-19.  
45.  Safegraph. “The Impact of Coronavirus (COVID-19) on Foot Traffic.” SafeGraph, December 23, 2020. https://safegraph.com/data-examples/
covid19-commerce-patterns/.
46. Ghana COVID 19 Hub. “Ghana COVID 19 Hub Main Page,” 2020. https://ghcovid19-statsghana.hub.arcgis.com/.
47.   UNICEF Office of Innovation. “Effects of Physical Distancing Measures.” UNICEF, 2020. https://www.unicef.org/innovation/magicbox/covid.
48. GitHub. “Datasketch/MOVID19: #MOVID19 Hackaton Para Buscar Soluciones al Reto Del Covid-19 En Transporte Público En Bogotá,” 2020. 
https://github.com/datasketch/MOVID19.
49.  Data Collaboratives. “Data Collaboratives Explorer,” 2018. http://datacollaboratives.org/explorer.html.
19
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

4. Current Practice: Insights 
from Five Case Studies
The  previous  sections  of  this  document  establish  how  mobility  data  has  been  used  by  businesses,  researchers,  
and  public  sector  agencies.  They  show  mobility  data  possesses  certain  inherent  risks  that  require  competent  
management,  institutional  safeguards,  and  personnel  committed  to  protecting  data  subjects  and  their  rights.  
However,  these  sections  also  show  that  mobility  data,  when  used  responsibly,  can  provide  valuable  insights  that  
support public health objectives. Indeed, the projects referenced above suggest governments, research institutions, 
civil society groups, and businesses consider location data to be useful for COVID-19 response and recovery. While 
the  outcome  of  many  of  these  projects  remain  unclear,  there  are  already  organizations  applying  location  data  to  
COVID-19 around the globe.
To better understand the elements of this ongoing work around mobility data, the research team researched five 
entries  in  its  mobility  data  collaborative  repository.  While  the  researchers  preferenced  projects  where  they  could  
secure  interviews,  these  case  studies  explored  projects  launched  in  different  regions  that  used  different  data  
collaborative types, project scopes, and data types. By drawing on these case studies, together with examples from 
the  broader  repository,  the  team  seeks  to  provide  insights  on  the  value,  needs,  obstacles  and  preconditions  for  
success  of  data  collaboratives  while  also  highlighting  governance  and  data  responsibility  challenges  involved  in  
using mobility data for COVID-19 response and beyond. While data collaboratives often involve multiple parties, we 
focus on the experiences of the demand side (data users) and the supply side (data providers). 
4.A. Comparative Insights 
Table 2: Overview of Insights from Mobility Data Collaborative Case Studies 
Description
Intended and 
Realized Impacts
Enablers
Risks and 
Challenges
COVID -19 
Mobility Data 
Network and 
Facebook Data 
for Good
The COVID-19 Mobility Data 
Network,    a    data    pooling    
collaborative,              merges              
the    efforts    of    Facebook    
Data   for   Good   and   other   
mobility      data      providers      
and   over   100   researchers   
and      epidemiologists      to      
understand    how,    in    lieu    
of   a   vaccine,   communities   
around the world are relying 
on          non-pharmaceutical          
interventions   to   slow   the   
spread of COVID-19.
The       COVID-19       Mobility       
Network  Movement  Range  
Map      Dashboard      aimed      
to      support      local      and      
state     governments     with     
county-level     insights     on     
patterns in human mobility. 
The      Network      mobilized      
researchers     to     work     on     
operational    health    issues    
and    continues    to    enable    
policy   monitoring   efforts,   
including  for  crises  beyond  
just the COVID-19 pandemic
The   research   team   noted   
the      publishing      of      the      
movement       range       map       
data   on   HDX   allowed   for   
a    significant    increase    in    
uptake  of  the  dataset  from  
decision-makers. 
The   team   also   noted   that   
participants,        particularly        
researchers, were motivated 
by a sense of public purpose.
The   Network   faced   some   
operational    challenges    in    
releasing data. For example, 
it   produced   datasets   too   
large  for  researchers  to  use  
them.   In   addition,      gaps   
in      data      and      analytical      
capacities      between      the      
non   profit   and   academic   
community    highlighted    a    
need  for  increased  capacity  
building   and   data   literacy   
programs as well as external 
data  expertise  to  have  on  
call for emerging threats.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
20

Description
Intended and 
Realized Impacts
Enablers
Risks and 
Challenges
European 
Commission 
Joint Research 
Centre - 
Mobility 
Functional 
Area Study
A data pooling collaborative 
spearheaded         by         the         
European            Commission            
Joint        Research        Centre        
in     collaboration     with     a     
dozen   telecom   companies   
from   across   the   EU.   The   
effort      used      aggregated      
and    de-identified    origin-
destination                matrices                
(ODMs)—the              number              
of    trips    between    certain    
points     during     a     certain     
reference period—to define 
geographic   units   in   each   
country     that     correspond     
with     real-world     mobility     
patterns         rather         than         
traditional      administrative      
boundaries.
The     analysis     established     
a   method   for   identifying   
Mobility    Functional    Areas    
(MFAs)   that   capture   real-
world     mobility     patterns.     
These         MFAs         support         
policymakers   in   deploying   
mobility     restrictions     and     
other    interventions    in    a    
more targeted way. To date, 
MFAs  have  been  integrated  
into a platform for approved 
decision-makers  across  the  
EU.    The    Commission    has    
formally          recommended          
their use by member states. 
The        collaborative        was        
created  urgently  with  little  
lead    time.    The    telecoms    
were     able     to     leverage     
existing        data        sharing        
infrastructure,         products,         
and    programs    to    rapidly    
and  securely  begin  sharing  
insights  with  the  European  
Commission. 
The effort was initiated after 
a high-level call to action by 
the European Commissioner 
for  the  Internal  Market.  This  
senior  political  buy-in  (and  
pressure)   likely   helped   to   
accelerate the effort.
The      data      provided      by      
the     telecoms     were     not     
uniformly   structured.   One   
ODM   might   capture   daily   
movements              between              
two    cities    while    another    
could   be   an   hourly   view   
of     movements     between     
provinces.  These  disparities  
necessitated           additional           
processing   to   render   the   
ODMs interoperable.
To             guard             against              
re-identification,           ODMs           
only  recorded  the  number  
of  aggregated  movements  
in  an  area  if  they  reached  
a    certain    threshold.    This    
important    safeguard    also    
lessened the mobility signal 
during       peak       lockdown       
periods  since  fewer  people  
left their homes.   
Greater 
London 
Authority 
Datastore 
- COVID-19 
Mobility 
Report
Led  by  the  Greater  London  
Authority’s       Datastore—a       
public   repository   of   freely   
available    datasets    related    
to  the  city  of  London—the  
COVID-19   Mobility   Report   
combines       six       mobility       
datasets from mostly private 
sources  to  provide  insights  
into      changing      mobility      
dynamics        in        London.        
Analyses include pedestrian 
activity, retail visitation, and 
home working.
The       data       collaborative       
provides    a    holistic    view    
into  how  mobility  has  been  
impacted      by      COVID-19,      
while   making   aggregated   
datasets   publicly   available   
for   bespoke   analysis   and   
sets the stage for continued 
use      of      private      sector      
mobility  data  for  economic  
recovery analyses.
Expertise    in    data    fusion    
with  the  ability  to  combine  
multiple   datasets   in   order   
to      provide      streamlined      
reports. 
The      Datastore      was      a       
pre-existing             platform,             
enabling   reach   to   a   wide   
audience.
Difficulty  in  sourcing  public  
sector  data  from  within  the  
same public organism.
Informes de 
Movilidad - 
Telefónica 
Chile and 
Universidad 
del Desarrollo
Through      a      multi-sector      
data         collaborative         in         
Chile,    researchers    at    the    
Universidad  de  Desarrollo’s  
Data Science Institute create 
nation-wide mobility
While    researchers    initially    
intended         to         publish         
academic         reports         on         
mobility  in  Chile,  thanks  to  
widespread media coverage 
and corporate philanthropy, 
this  project  grew  to  a  wider  
program     providing     vital     
situational     awareness     to     
Chile’s  Ministry  of  Science,  
and the general public.
This  project  benefited  from  
a  longstanding  partnership  
between    Telefonica    Chile    
and   UDD.   UDD’s   existing   
collaborative             network             
of      data      scientists      and      
epidemiologists also helped 
accelerate        methodology        
development.      Finally,   the   
project was further enabled 
by public exposure through 
data journalism.
Since     the     Informes     de     
Movilidad    have    a    direct    
impact    on    public    policy,    
and given Chile’s historically 
polarized   political   climate,   
there  was  a  strong  need  for  
statistical  robustness  of  the  
models  used  to  create  the  
reports. 
21
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

Description
Intended and 
Realized Impacts
Enablers
Risks and 
Challenges
University 
of Toronto 
Canadian 
Mobility 
Analysis
Mobility        Proximity        in        
Canada          During          the          
COVID-19       Pandemic       is       
the    result    of    a    research    
analysis    partnership    data    
collaborative            between            
the        Innovation        Policy        
Lab    at    the    University    of    
Toronto,   Cuebiq,   and   the   
ISI  Foundation.  The  report  
highlights        changes        in        
mobility      and      proximity      
throughout    the    COVID-19    
pandemic  in  Canada.  Using  
anonymized       smartphone       
data        with        differential        
privacy   from   Cuebiq,   the   
publication  helps  decision-
makers   and   the   public   to   
understand  the  impacts  of  
social  distancing  measures  
on Canadian life. The report 
found that while movement 
levels    have    been    largely    
restored,    proximity    levels    
have    not    increased    and    
Canadians continue to avoid 
interacting with others.
Researchers              intended              
the      work      would      help      
policymakers,  scholars,  and  
the  public  understand  the  
impact   of   restrictions   and   
public adherence to them.
Following   publication,   the   
report   received   significant   
press    coverage    that    the    
authors of the report believe 
influenced  public  behavior  
and  decisions.  The  research  
team         also         presented         
findings    to    various    local    
officials  through  a  series  of  
public policy seminars.
The           research           team           
credited                   significant                   
support    from    its    partner    
organizations,   Cuebiq   and   
the ISI Foundation, as being 
integral     to     the     project.     
The  partners  were  able  to  
provide     technical     advice     
and   guidance   on   analysis   
that informed the work.
Researchers      encountered      
some   time   delays   due   to   
the   need   to   negotiate   a   
responsible     data     sharing     
agreement    that    met    the    
needs   of   Cuebiq   and   the   
Innovation Policy Lab.
Lockdown  measures  meant  
that  researchers  could  not  
easily      access      university      
equipment       to       securely       
access         datasets.         The         
team   needed   to   develop   
workarounds     to     address     
these   and   other   logistical   
challenges.
The      team      had      limited      
financial     resources     after     
it    did    not    receive    grant    
funding. 
4.B. Insights from Data Users
As previously detailed, there are a number of different mobility data user personae with distinct needs, capabilities 
and resources. In our detailed case studies alone, users include academic researchers, local city authorities, national 
governments,  and  intergovernmental  organizations.  Within  the  broader  mobility  data  collaborative  repository,  
users  are  further  represented  by  data  journalists,  NGOs,  and  the  general  public.  Taken  together,  we  provide  here  
common needs, obstacles, enabling conditions and issues around governance and privacy. 
Needs
• 
Real-time data: Given the rapidly evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic—with constantly shifting 
geographic  hot  spots,  heterogeneous  containment  policies  and  rampant  misinformation  within  the  public  
realm—the need for consistent and real-time data is paramount. This need is especially true for the public 
sector. While an abundance of academic literature on mobility has been published throughout the pandemic, 
static  reporting  from  the  beginning  of  2020  are  of  limited  utility  for  decision-makers  weighing  quarantine  
and economic reopening policies today. In the case of the Greater London Authority’s Datastore, for example, 
the  Datastore  team  sought  regularly  updated  datasets—such  as  Google’s  COVID-19  Community  Mobility  
Reports—to  provide  updated  reports  on  the  dynamic  state  of  mobility  in  London  throughout  the  city’s  
multiple lockdowns.
• 
Locally relevant data: COVID-19 cases have appeared in nearly every country around the world, yet the 
distribution of cases across regions, countries, and even within cities, is far from uniform.
50
 Highly aggregated 
statistics  at  a  national  or  county-equivalent  may  be  sufficient  for  certain  user  personae,  such  as  national  
50. World Health Organization. “WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard.” Accessed January 5, 2021. https://covid19.who.int.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
22

health  authorities  or  epidemiologists.  For  other  users  like  local  public  officials,  however,  localized  data  is  
often  required  for  contextualized  decision-making.  While  Google’s  COVID-19  Community  Mobility  Reports  
met the real-time needs of the London Datastore, for example, the same data source was deemed insufficient 
for inclusion in Chile’s Informes de Movilidad, since it only provides insights at the provincial level. Similarly, 
when  the  City  of  New  York  launched  its  Recovery  Data  Partnership,  New  York  officials  sought  out  mobility  
datasets  from  Safegraph,  Foursquare,  and  Cuebiq,  which  offer  city  and  borough-level  insights  needed  to  
inform  decision-making  in  the  US’s  largest  city.
51
  Localized  data  is  particularly  important  for  cities  or  local  
governments in developing countries, where there is traditionally poor access to relevant data and a lack of 
competencies or skills (e.g. developers, data scientists)
• 
Capacity,  allies,  and  intermediaries:  Actors  that  could  represent  the  demand  for  mobility  data,  
including public health bodies and government agencies, may lack the internal data science capacity necessary 
to design and implement the analyzed data made available to them. Several projects in our repository and 
analyzed in our case studies involved public entities forming consortia or engaging intermediaries to extend 
their capacity for deriving value from mobility data. The continued development of incentives and business 
models for data intermediaries could help to unlock more and more responsible use of insights derived from 
mobility data for public problem-solving. 
Obstacles
• 
Interoperability: Singular  datasets  are  rarely  capable  of  delivering  transformative  insights.  Many  of  the  
data collaboratives in our sample involve the commingling or pooling of mobility data of multiple types and 
from multiple sources. Even when the gathered datasets are of the same format, structural differences, such 
as the data’s reference period or geographic unit, or disparities in their approach to metadata could introduce 
analytical challenges for demand side actors.
• 
Shifting focus and priorities: A data collaborative’s effectiveness and level of responsibility can depend 
on  having  a  clear  purpose,  organizing  questions,  or  problem  statement.  Data  collaboration  can  require  
significant  lead  time  to  allow  parties  to  come  to  terms  on  operational,  governance,  legal,  technical,  and  
financial considerations. In a rapidly emerging environment, such as a rampant global pandemic, the priority 
questions  or  analytical  focus  areas  can  rapidly  shift  due  to  abrupt  changes  in  political,  social,  economic,  or  
public health circumstances. 
• 
Siloed  data  holders:  When  seeking  access  to  relevant  datasets  with  the  potential  to  inform  decision-
making,  a  logical  place  for  public  sector  stakeholders  to  start  is  within  the  same  public  organism  in  which  
they operate. However, as demonstrated across several data collaboratives within the detailed case studies 
and broader repository, it was sometimes easier for public agencies to source mobility data externally from 
the private sector than from internal agencies under the same umbrella, such as transportation authorities.  
• 
Lack  of  resources:  Even  absent  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  many  organizations  operate  in  a  world  of  
constrained resources. A lack of funding or ability to access necessary equipment can force organizations to 
stop their research or scale back their scope. It can also force organizations to rely on third party consultants 
and other groups. Many private-sector data providers have stepped in to open access to mobility datasets 
through  data  philanthropy  programs.  Although  some  mobility  providers  had  existing  corporate  social  
responsibility and “Data for Good” programs before the pandemic began, it remains unclear to what extent 
continued in-kind data donations will be the norm across the entire ecosystem.
• 
Data limitations: Mobility data can be the source of significant insights on human movement but it is not 
wholly  representative  of  real-world  activity.  Rather,  mobility  data  relies  on  proxies,  such  as  the  movement  
of  cellphones,  smartphones  and  other  devices.  CDR  originating  from  a  single  telco,  for  example,  will  only  
contain a user panel of the company’s subscribers, which may skew towards certain demographic segments. 
51.  NYC Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics, supra note 29.
23
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

As previously mentioned, smartphone-derived mobility data can in some cases under represent elderly and 
low-income populations. It is therefore necessary for mobility data users to ascertain the representativeness 
of the mobility data in question, and, if necessary, to perform post stratification to create a properly weighted 
user panel.
52
Enabling Conditions for Success
Actionable problem definition: The use of mobility data is unlikely to create decision-making value absent a 
clear, granular, and actionable problem definition or organizing question. Given the many competing needs and 
priorities involved in the response to COVID-19, practitioners could look to participatory problem definition efforts 
that enable experts and citizens to identify the use cases with the greatest potential for positive impact.
53
 
• 
Clear  safeguards:  Mobility  data  can  be  highly  sensitive.  Demand-side  actors,  especially  those  subject  
to  institutional  review  boards  or  other  ethics  bodies  and  processes,  require  clear  articulation  from  data  
providers  regarding  how  data  is  being  protected  and  how  it  can  (and  cannot)  be  used.  Without  guardrails  
in place, demand-side actors are likely to struggle both in the design of responsible data reuse efforts and in 
gaining institutional support and clearance for these efforts.   
• 
Data  competency,  expertise  and  right-sizing:  Demand-side  actors  can  struggle  to  use  mobility  
data  collaboration  without  the  data  science  expertise  required  to  manipulate  data  or  the  capabilities  
needed  to  set  institutional  priorities  and  put  insights  into  action.  Absent  sophisticated  competencies,   
demand-side actors can benefit from others “right sizing” the data that they consume. For example, if NGOs lack  
in-house data science expertise, they can seek and use more aggregated, user-friendly datasets in the form 
of dashboards. 
• 
Ability to translate insights into action: Deriving insights from mobility data for COVID-19 response 
is no doubt an important endeavor, but in order for data collaboratives to be truly effective, it is important 
that  results  do  not  simply  sit  on  a  shelf.  By  widely  broadcasting  research  findings  and  actively  networking  
with decision-makers who have the ability to put results into practice, data collaboratives can better position 
themselves to make a real impact. Practitioners should guard against both misuse of data, as well as missed 
use of data.
54
 
• 
Collaborative networks: Perhaps the strongest enabler of success is the ability for demand-side actors 
to  draw  on  a  collaborative  network  of  data-scientists,  researchers,  and  public  sector  stakeholders.  Among  
our  five  detailed  case  studies  and  roughly  50  data  collaboratives  featured  in  the  broader  repository,  social  
networks  abound,  with  many  data  scientists  teaming  up  across  different  institutions  to  co-author  papers  
and reports. Such networks facilitate the sharing of methods, data resources, and even funding in order to 
accelerate the pace of research and downstream impact. 
• 
Agile  Leadership:  Given  the  rapidly  developing  nature  of  the  pandemic,  many  data  collaboratives  can  
benefit from leaders who can quickly coordinate and facilitate data sharing. These individuals, data stewards, 
can allow organizations to work toward their goals of promoting the public instead of letting work become 
bogged down in bureaucratic or administrative procedures.
52.  Bakker, Michiel, Alex Berke, Matt Groh, Alex’Sandy Pentland, and Esteban Moro. “Effect of social distancing measures in the New York City 
metropolitan area.” Boston: Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2020). http://curveflattening.media.mit.edu/socialdistance4_14.pdf 
53. Verhulst, Stefaan. “Solving a Problem Starts by Asking the Right Question | Apolitical.” apolitical, September 2, 2019. https://apolitical.co/
en/solution_article/raw-data-wont-solve-our-problems-asking-the-right-questions-will.
54. https://www.unglobalpulse.org/2019/03/unpacking-the-issue-of-missed-use-and-misuse-of-data/ 
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
24

Governance and Privacy Issues
• 
Scope  of  purpose  and  retention:  The  severity  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  calls  for  an  extraordinary  
multi-sector  response.  However,  what  is  required  during  a  global  emergency  may  not  be  good  practice  
during normal times, especially when privacy, civil liberties are at stake. When designing data collaboratives, 
it  is  crucial  to  determine  the  scope  of  purpose  for  the  use  case  while  also  defining  clear  guidelines  around  
when underlying data should be destroyed, as well as what use cases or applications should be off limits, such 
as law enforcement or surveillance of individuals and vulnerable populations. 
• 
Working with trusted intermediaries: When demand-side actors include public sector authorities, it 
can be helpful to work with intermediaries that are trusted (or even appointed) by the general public. These 
actors can serve in multiple ways, such as ethical review boards, or as true intermediaries who execute all of 
the data processing before passing on highly aggregated insights to the public sector.
• 
Compiling previously distributed mobility datastreams: Just as the compilation of various data 
streams from various data sources can create interoperability challenges for demand side actors, pooled data 
can  also  amplify  privacy  risks.  For  example,  certain  de-identified  datasets  could  be  subject  to  the  “mosaic  
effect.”  The  mosaic  effect  refers  to  the  analysis  of  seemingly  innocuous,  de-identified  data  together  with  
other available datastreams to re-identify individuals.
55
 The compilation of multiple datastreams could also 
create  risks  that  differential  privacy  mechanisms,  which  introduce  synthetic  noise  into  a  dataset  without  
decreasing its analytical utility, might falter if the same mobility patterns are captured and made accessible 
by multiple data providers. 
4.C. Insights from Data Suppliers
While each mobility data type has benefits and limitations, a common factor between them is that most are derived 
from  private  sector  companies.  This  origin  carries  with  it  shared  needs,  obstacles,  and  enablers  for  the  successful  
implementation  of  mobility  data  collaboratives  from  the  supply  side.  It  also  has  implications  for  governance  and  
privacy. 
Needs
• 
Regulatory clarity: While it may appear that privacy regulations such as the California Consumer Privacy 
Act and GDPR would be anathema to private sector data companies, such regulations are effective at setting 
clear  ground  rules  and  distinguishing  between  fair  players  and  those  who  act  in  bad  faith.  Indeed,  private  
sector mobility data providers have a vested interest in establishing a clear and fair regulatory environment 
to enable both long term and ethical value creation. 
• 
Well-structured agreements: When establishing collaborative initiatives between data providers and 
users, it is important for parties to begin with a shared understanding of each other’s goals, requirements, 
and responsibilities. While emergencies such as pandemics call for swift action, well-structured agreements 
are  critical  not  only  for  operational  purposes  but  also  to  ensure  that  demand-side  actors  understand  and  
observe regulations and applicable laws related to handling mobility data. 
Obstacles
• 
Perception risks: Even when data is highly aggregated to preserve privacy and provided philanthropically 
for  COVID-19  response,  data  suppliers  run  the  risk  of  being  perceived  as  aiding  unpopular  government  
55. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. “C. The Mosaic Effect.” ASPE, November 23, 2015. https://aspe.hhs.gov/re-
port/minimizing-disclosure-risk-hhs-open-data-initiatives/c-mosaic-effect.
25
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

policies—such  as  lockdowns—especially  when  such  policies  are  related  to  controversial  or  unpopular  
decisions  by  government  users.  Some  organizations  may  also  be  reluctant  to  initiate  a  data  partnership  to  
mitigate the perceived risk of sharing sensitive data. 
• 
Long-term sustainability: With ongoing financial challenges related to the halting economic recovery 
across the world, many private sector data firms will have to consider the feasibility of continuing to engage 
in data philanthropy, especially if data philanthropy programs represent a cost center for the business. 
Enabling Conditions for Success 
• 
Existing Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) program: Companies with existing CSR programs, 
such as Telefónica Chile, were well prepared to supply privacy preserving data for COVID-19 response because 
the data exchange was an extension of existing business practices. CSR programs and social impact initiatives 
can allow organizations to develop the competencies needed to responsibly share data when a crisis emerges.
• 
Collaborative  networks:  In  the  same  way  that  collaborative  networks  aid  supply-side  actors  seeking  
co-collaborators  and  support  on  topics  such  as  data  science  and  methodology  development,  so  too  
do  data  suppliers  benefit  from  strong  collaborative  networks  that  can  facilitate  data  collaboration.  For  
example, when COVID-19 emerged as a global health threat, Cuebiq’s existing Data for Good program had 
developed collaborations with dozens of research institutions and NGOs across North America and Europe. 
By  establishing  its  own  data  collaborative  in  the  early  days  of  the  pandemic,  Cuebiq  was  able  to  facilitate  
methodology  sharing  and  collaboration  between  existing  partners,  such  as  the  ISI  Foundation,  and  new  
collaborators, such as the University of Toronto. 
• 
Detailed demand definition: Since many big data companies in the private sector spend their resources 
on designing products and services for commercial applications, it is helpful for supply-side actors to have 
a clear understanding of the demand for data among public sector users and their needs. If a demand-side 
actor expresses the need for user-friendly insights, a data supplier might seek to provide highly aggregated 
and privacy-preserving insights through more simplistic interfaces, such as dashboards. 
Governance and Privacy Issues  
Given the privacy sensitivity inherent in human mobility data, clear governance, compliance and privacy frameworks 
are  necessary  to  ethically  use  mobility  data  for  socially  impactful  work,  such  as  COVID-19  response.  Such  data  
governance and responsibility frameworks are most effective when they identify and mitigate risks across the data 
lifecycle,  which  includes  planning,  collecting,  processing,  sharing,  analyzing,  and  using.  Opportunities,  risks,  and  
challenges  can  emerge  at  each  stage  of  the  life  cycle,  and  risks  introduced  at  earlier  stages  can  compound  and  
accumulate as the project progresses. Organizations have an obligation to be aware of these consequences.
Just  as  there  are  successful  cases  of  mobility  data  being  used  for  good,  there  are  also  instances  of  unethical  
practices  resulting  from  the  absence  of  rigorous  governance  and  privacy  frameworks.  Some  of  these  practices  
are  a  consequence  of  the  current  mobility  data  ecosystem,  an  ecosystem  in  which  mobility  data  is  often  shared  
through  data  brokerages,  a  process  in  which  datasets  are  sourced  from  a  variety  of  suppliers  and  then  resold  to  
interested third party users. Experts around the world have voiced several concerns over this approach, including 
its  implications  for  surveillance  efforts,  the  loss  of  individual  privacy,  and  misuse  of  personal  data.  For  example,  
NRK Radio, a Norwegian government-owned radio and television public broadcasting company, released a report 
indicating that over 8,300 mobile devices were being tracked while at hospitals or women’s shelters. This location 
data was easily available to NRK for purchase (for about USD 4,000), allowing them to gain access to information on 
the travel history of thousands of Norwegian citizens.
56
 In addition, the location-data company X-Mode (which itself 
56.  Gundersen, Martin. “My Phone Was Spying on Me, so I Tracked Down the Surveillants.” NRKbeta, December 3, 2020. ht tps: //nrk b e t a .
no/2020/12/03/my-phone-was-spying-on-me-so-i-tracked-down-the-surveillants/.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
26

conducted  COVID-19  related  analyses
57
),  was  found  to  be  collecting  precise  location  data  from  users  of  a  popular  
Muslim prayer app without obtaining explicit and named consent from users.
58
 Beyond the surreptitious provenance 
of its data, X-Mode also sold individual-level location data to downstream users including private investigator firms 
and the US military’s counterterrorism operations.
59
 While this data was pseudo-anonymized, it did not incorporate 
differential privacy enhancements to preclude re-identification of individual users.
60
Interviews  and  desk  research  found  that  individuals  who  participated  in  all  five  of  the  projects  understood  the  
need to guarantee competent and responsible use of mobility data. However, given the dearth of clear national or 
internationally agreed standards of practice, many institutions are left to develop their own frameworks that rely on 
existing institutional mechanisms to promote ethical use. This lack of consistent and transparent standards alongside 
the absence of accountability mechanisms represents a notable gap in several of the projects. The research team 
notes that data users and data suppliers have an obligation to acknowledge and proactively mitigate risk in the areas 
they work and to promote meaningful governance and privacy standards. 
5 7.   X-Mode Blog. “X-Mode Offers Premium Data for COVID-19 Research.” Accessed January 7, 2021. https://xmode.io/covid-19/.
58.  Ibid.
59.  Cox, Joseph. “Apple and Google Push Location Tracker X-Mode Out of App Stores.” Vice, December 9, 2020, sec. Tech. https://www.vice.
com/en/article/g5bjpx/apple-google-x-mode-xmode-app-stores.
60.  Cox supra n ote 15.
27
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

5. Prescriptive Analysis: 
Recommendations for the 
Future
In the previous sections of this document, we describe what mobility data is and how it has been used to produce 
insights on COVID-19. While mobility data has unique characteristics that differentiate it from other data types, it still 
fits into a broader framework of data use and reuse, one that The GovLab, Cuebiq, and their partners have used to 
inform their reaction to the current crisis.
In March 2020, the GovLab put out a call to build the “data infrastructure and ecosystem [organizations] need to tackle 
pandemics and other dynamic societal and environmental threats.” Amplified by the World Health Organization and 
endorsed  by  over  400  signatories,  the  call  to  action  focused  on  seven  action  areas,  detailed  below.
61
  We  expand  
upon these action areas to provide recommendations specific to mobility data while also seeking to improve current 
practices and enable future collaboration beyond COVID-19. 
The following actions have the potential to enable more effective, sustainable, and responsible re-use of mobility 
data  through  data  collaboration  to  support  decision-making  regarding  pandemic  prevention,  monitoring,  and  
response. These actions, recommended in response to the our findings, include: 
1. Developing  and  Clarifying  Governance  Framework to  enable  the  trusted,  transparent,  and  
accountable reuse of privately held data in the public interest under a clear regulatory framework. 
By creating a common and publicly available mobility data-sharing agreement template, organizations can 
set and define standards on critical issues such as scope of purpose, data reuse, and prohibited use cases. In 
coordination  with  stakeholders  (such  as  public  sector  agencies),  they  can  also  establish  standards  around  
privacy-preserving measures that go beyond simple anonymization or outline requirements needed for the 
specific  context.  In  the  Global  South,  for  instance,  organizations  may  outline  procedures  that  encourage  
Global  South  institutions  to  conduct  their  own  data  collection  and  analysis  to  avoid  the  need  for  other  
countries to extract data.
2. Building  Capacity  of  Organizations  in  the  public  and  private  sector  to  reuse  and  act  on  data  
through investments in training, education, and reskilling of relevant authorities; especially driving support 
for institutions in the Global South
Organizations on the supply and demand side of data collaboratives could benefit from a focused effort to 
build the data science skills and capacity they possess. This work could involve retraining existing personnel 
to bolster their data skills, creating and hiring for new data science roles and functions, and investing in efforts 
to distribute data science knowledge and competency across the organization instead of creating siloed data 
teams  or  units.  Building  this  competency  could  an  organization  shift  toward  a  more  data-driven  culture,  
and  enable  it  to  more  rapidly  act  upon  opportunities  to  reuse  data,  including  mobility  data,  to  respond  to  
emerging situations. Enabling support for traditionally under-resourced institutions, especially those in the 
Global South, to self-sufficiently conduct data collection and analysis and can drive a more interconnected, 
well-equipped data ecosystem. 
61.  UN Stats Hub. “Call for Action: COVID-19 Data Collaboratives | COVID-19 Response,” March 30, 2020. https://covid-19-response.unstatshub.
org/useful-links/covid-19-data-collaboratives/.
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
28

3. Establishing Data Stewards in organizations who can coordinate and collaborate with counterparts 
on using data in the public’s interest and acting on it.
In data collaborative efforts in which both a large number of datasets and participants are involved, projects 
suffer  from  a  lack  of  clearly  defined  roles  and  responsibilities.  Data  stewards—individuals  or  teams  tasked  
with  collaborating  on  data  projects  with  external  partners,  protecting  potential  customers  and  users,  and  
acting to ensure this data is used responsibly—can facilitate more coordinated and efficient data projects for 
emerging threats. 
62
4. Establishing  Dedicated  and  Sustainable  CSR  Programs  on  Data  in  organizations  to  
coordinate and collaborate with counterparts on using and acting upon data in the public’s interest.
By  building  CSR  into  the  mission  of  private  sector  mobility  data  organizations,  it  is  possible  to  lay  the  
groundwork  for  more  rapid,  effective  and  ethical  deployment  of  mobility  data  in  emergency  situations.  
Rather  than  establishing  them  as  one-off  projects  or  cost  centers  within  organizations,  corporate  social  
responsibility programs are designed with long-term sustainability in mind, with opportunities for creating 
shared value both for society, and for the organization. 
5. Building  a  Network  of  data  stewards  to  coordinate  and  streamline  efforts  while  promoting  greater  
transparency; as well as exchange best practices and lessons learned.
Mature networks of collaborators serve as enablers for both demand- and supply-side actors throughout the 
pandemic. Although some forums for mobility data collaboration already exist, they tend to be sporadic and 
limited in sector diversity.
63
 More consistent collaborative forums composed of players across private, public, 
and academic sectors have the potential to more rapidly replicate the organic growth of collaborative social 
networks. 
6. Engaging Citizens about how their data is being used so clearly articulate how they want their data to 
be responsibly used, shared, and protected.
Before the pandemic, data reuse sparked significant concerns and misconceptions about how data was (and 
was  not)  collected,  shared,  and  reused.  The  urgency  and  confusion  caused  by  the  COVID-19  pandemic  has  
only amplified these challenges. Stakeholders on the supply and demand side of mobility data collaboratives 
could alleviate public concerns and better reflect public preferences in their work by implementing programs 
to engage with citizens and other stakeholders. This work could involve organizing public deliberations on 
the  reuse  of  mobility  data  through  citizens  assemblies  or  collaborative  policy  development  initiatives  (also  
known  as  crowdlaw).
64
  The  GovLab’s  Data  Assembly,  for  example,  engaged  cohorts  of  data  holders  and  
policymakers, civic rights and advocacy organization representatives, and New Yorkers from across the five 
boroughs to understand and synthesize these groups’ common and competing perceptions on responsible 
data reuse and COVID-19.
65
  
7.   Promoting Technological Innovation through collaboration between funders (e.g. governments 
and  foundations)  and  researchers  (e.g.  data  scientists)  to  develop  and  deploy  useful,  privacy-preserving  
technologies.
The approaches for privacy preservation and ethical data collection listed in this report represent practices 
currently  deployed  in  the  market  broadly  or  among  early  adopters.  However,  with  the  emergence  of  
compelling  new  technologies,  there  is  potential  to  redefine  not  only  how  data  is  collected  and  shared  but  
62.  Verhulst, Stefaan. “Wanted: Data Stewards.” Brooklyn, New York: The GovLab, March 2020. https://www.thegovlab.org/static/files/publica-
tions/wanted-data-stewards.pdf.
63.  NetMob. “NetMob 2019,” July 10, 2019. https://netmob.org/.
64.  The GovLab. “CrowdLaw: Online Public Participation in Lawmaking.” CrowdLaw-Online Public Participation in Lawmaking. Accessed 
January 7, 2021. https://crowd.law/.
65.  Young, Andrew, Stefaan Verhulst, Nadiya Safonova, and Andrew J. Zahuranec. “The Data Assembly: Responsible Data Re-Use Framework.” 
Brooklyn, New York: The GovLab, n.d. https://thedataassembly.org/files/nyc-data-assembly-report.pdf.
29
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

also how value is shared across individuals, organizations, and society at large. Technologies such as smart 
contracts and homomorphic encryption, for example, allow for data owners to retain full control over how 
their  data  is  used,  and  what  it  is  used  for,  while  also  enabling  data  scientists  to  query  data  without  taking  
control of the first party data itself. These technologies, along with emerging data sharing frameworks, also 
enable data owners to share in the monetary value generated by their personal data downstream, thereby 
providing both greater agency and incentive for users to contribute to and engage with the data economy. 
8. Unlocking  Funds  from  a  variety  of  sources  to  ensure  projects  are  sustainable  and  can  operate  long  
term.
The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  demonstrated  unprecedented  demand  for  big  data  and  the  potential  for  the  
public  sector  to  rapidly  adopt  emerging  technologies  in  times  of  crisis.  Where  possible,  the  public  sector  
could  allocate  resources  not  only  for  future  preparedness  but  also  to  build  the  human  resource  capacity  
required  to  use  big  data  across  a  multitude  of  use  cases  beyond  COVID-19  and  public  health.  While  some  
corporations  already  engage  in  data  philanthropy,  the  private  sector  might  consider  direct  funding  of  
readiness  and  capacity  building  programs,  which  would  not  only  generate  positive  social  impact,  but  also  
further increase demand for big data for commercial applications within the public sector. 
9. Increase Research and Spur Evidence Gathering by publishing easily accessible research and 
creating dedicated centers to develop best practices.
Though there is an increasing interest in data collaboration and data reuse, the field is held back, ironically, by 
a lack of good evidence on the conditions under which these approaches work best. There are few empirical 
studies that could guide or accelerate new initiatives. Best practices largely remain limited. These gaps make 
it  hard  to  design  good  initiatives  and  to  convince  organizations  to  participate  and  support  them.  As  such,  
data  scientists  and  researchers  might  seek  to  foster  new  research  and  to  ensure  these  resources  are  open  
access so they can reach a broad audience. A centralized research center, such as an observatory dedicated to 
assessing the value of mobility data for good, might also be valuable for researchers.
In this report we discuss various enablers and preconditions for successful and effective data collaboratives. Sadly, 
the greatest enabler of these data collaboratives’ success was perhaps the extreme urgency of a tragic global health 
emergency.  By  learning  from  these  experiences,  however,  it  is  possible  to  drive  more  effective  collaboration  and  
deliver more meaningful outcomes through the responsible use of big data not only for the current pandemic and 
recovery process but for a multitude of challenges where big data can be ethically applied for the benefit of society. 
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
30

6. About the Authors
The GovLab
Aditi Ramesh 
Stefaan Verhulst 
Andrew Young 
Andrew J. Zahuranec 
Cuebiq
Brennan Lake
Open Data Institute
Ben Snaith 
Olivier Thereaux 
The GovLab
The  Governance  Lab  at  New  York  University’s  Tandon  School  of  Engineering,  The  GovLab,  is  an  action  research  
center  whose  mission  is  to  strengthen  the  ability  of  institutions  –  including  but  not  limited  to  governments  –  
and  people  to  work  more  openly,  collaboratively,  effectively  and  legitimately  to  make  better  decisions  and  solve  
public problems. The GovLab’s existing Data Collaborative framework identifies the factors that make data-sharing 
partnerships  effective  in  generating  public  value,  as  well  as  providing  a  blueprint  for  designing  successful  Data  
Collaboratives while also embedding principles of responsible data use. As an extension of this work, The GovLab’s 
#Data4COVID-19 project provides a living repository of 175 multi-stakeholder data collaboratives focusing on data 
sharing  throughout  the  pandemic,  including  31  projects  focused  primarily  on  mobility  data  sharing  -  enabling  a  
jumpstart of the above project with early deliverables from mid November onwards. 
 Cuebiq Data for Good
“Data for Good” is the corporate social responsibility program of Cuebiq, a mobility data platform. Since 2016, Cuebiq 
has provided mobility data and insights for over 100 academic research projects and humanitarian initiatives related 
to human mobility. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic alone, Cuebiq established a COVID-19 Data Collaborative 
to  provide  privacy  preserving  mobility  data  to  dozens  of  organizations,  including  the  CDC,  the  City  of  New  York,  
UNICEF, the World Bank, Johns Hopkins University, and Oxford, among many others. Beyond the establishment of 
a formal COVID-19 Data Collaborative, Cuebiq has built a model for responsible mobility data sharing grounded in 
ethical data provenance and privacy by design.
31
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

Open Data Institute
The ODI was co-founded in 2012 by the inventor of the web Sir Tim Berners-Lee and artificial intelligence expert Sir 
Nigel Shadbolt to show the value of open data, and to advocate for the innovative use of open data to affect positive 
change across the globe.
We’re an independent, non-profit, non-partisan company that, since our creation, has welcomed high-profile board 
members  including  Mumsnet  founder  Justine  Roberts,  Lastminute.com  founder  Baroness  Martha  Lane  Fox  and  
former European Commissioner Neelie Kroes.
Headquartered in London, with an international reach, hundreds of members, thousands of people trained, dozens 
of startups incubated, and a convening space in the heart of the capital, we invite everyone interested in developing 
with data – whether on an individual, organisational or global level – to get in touch.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following individuals for their support in supporting the interviews, peer 
review, and report development processes: 
Claire Molinaro (Cuebiq) 
Michelle Winowatan (GovLab) 
Leo Ferres (Universidad del Desarrollo)  
Anita McGahan (University of Toronto) 
Gabriel Cavalli (University of Toronto)  
Daniel Trabucchi (Politecnico di Milano)  
Dominique Diouf (Open AIR) 
Tarnjeet Kang (Independent Consultant) 
Marjiana Novak (Circle Economy) 
Albert Ali Salah (Utrecht University) 
Laura McGorman (Facebook) 
Andrew Schroeder (DirectRelief) 
Richard Benjamins (Telefonica Research) 
Michele Vespe (European Commission)
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
32

7.    Appendix 1: Mobility Data 
Type
Refers to the type of mobility data and its provenance. Its categories include:
Call Detail Records “CDR” (Telco): 
Call Detail Records, “CDRs” are records that are generated by telecommunication companies when mobile phone 
users make calls, send SMS text messages or use data to connect to the internet (see also XDR). When one user calls 
another, for example, a typical CDR will include a row of data for the following columns:
• 
Timestamp
• 
Duration of call
• 
Caller identifier 
• 
Recipient identifier
• 
Cell tower IDs (origin and destination)
• 
Event type (e.g. call, text, data)
To extract location data insights from CDRs, analysts can infer a mobile phone’s positioning based on the coverage 
radius of the cell tower that services the mobile phone’s call, text, or data activities. When multiple cell towers are 
used by a single mobile phone, it is possible to triangulate the position of the phone in order to improve accuracy. 
Telecommunications companies can also measure the time for cellular antennas to reach a mobile phone in addition 
to signal strength in order to estimate distance in a process called trilateration. 
CDR use generally benefits from a large amount of data in terms of overall panel size (user count) since CDR datasets 
often contain all records from all users within a given telecommunication company’s network. As a drawback, since 
the radius of coverage of cell towers is quite large, CDRs have significantly lower accuracy and precision as compared 
to alternative data sources, such as GPS. 
x-DRs: 
x-DRs  function  similarly  to  CDRs  with  the  key  distinction  that  x-DRs  are  exclusively  based  on  the  data  usage  of  a  
mobile  phone,  rather  than  calling  or  SMS  text  messaging.  Since  data  usage  involves  one  party,  there  is  only  one  
phone identifier.
Software Development Kit derived Smartphone GPS data (SDK): 
A Software Development Kit, “SDK” is a piece of software that is integrated into a smartphone application, generally 
on Android and iOS—the two most prominent smartphone operating systems. While SDKs can be used for many 
types of features and functionalities, within the realm of location data an SDK enables smartphone apps to collect 
location data by using the device’s own hardware, such as GPS, Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. (For the purpose of this report, 
we refer to SDK derived Smartphone data as GPS data.) 
The usage of SDK location data generally benefits from a higher accuracy (~10 meters) and precision as compared to 
sources such as CDRs. On the other hand, some sources of accessible SDK location data may have smaller panel sizes 
33
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

since they are derived from limited sets of applications with various user counts. 
An exception to this is SDK derived data from large app developers, such as Facebook (which manages Facebook 
App, Instagram, and WhatsApp) and Google (which manages Google Maps and YouTube among other platforms), 
whose apps have billions of users. These companies however, commonly referred to as “walled gardens”, have more 
restrictions and less flexibility in providing access to mobility data for use outside of their own activities. 
• 
First-Party, SDK-derived data: 
“First-party” refers to data that is collected by an entity directly from the smartphone user, without intermediary 
brokers.  This  distinction  is  relevant  in  regard  to  both  data  accuracy,  as  well  as  privacy.  Since  there  are  no  
intermediaries  collecting  the  data  between  the  user  and  the  collector,  data  is  generally  collected  through  
a  single  collection  methodology  and  it  therefore  does  not  require  cleansing  or  manipulation  to  produce  a  
methodologically consistent dataset. In terms of privacy, when there is a direct relationship between a user 
and a collector, there is a transparent path for users to opt-in and understand the extent to which their data 
will  be  used  downstream,  and  the  direct  relationship  facilitates  GDPR  compliance  in  order  to  execute  user  
requests such as opting out, portability and erasure. 
• 
Third-party, SDK-derived data: 
“Third-party” refers to data that is collected by one entity then resold to others who often combine datasets 
from  various  sources.  Using  data  that  is  collected  from  multiple  sources  can  make  it  difficult  to  conduct  
methodologically  consistent  analyses.  Additionally,  this  process  obscures  the  provenance  of  the  data  in  
terms of whether data was provided with informed consent, while also making it difficult to execute GDPR 
compliance requests. 
BidStream Data: 
BidStream  location  data  is  derived  from  the  bidding  that  occurs  between  buyers  and  sellers  of  programmatic  
advertising, such as pay-per-click advertising on websites or mobile apps. When ad impressions are served to a user 
through programmatic advertising, the advertiser can “bid” on their ad placement through an automated auction 
process. Even if an advertiser does not win the ad placement, they are able to retrieve metadata from users exposed 
to the ad, including IP address, which can be used to infer location. 
While BidStream data is generally large in scale due to the sheer volume of programmatic advertising, it is typically 
inaccurate as it infers location through an IP address, which often cover several miles of coverage and thousands of 
households per IP address. Furthermore, BidStream data presents ethical challenges as the data is obtained without 
users explicit consent and without a path for users to opt-out from their data being collected. 
Wearable GPS:
Wearable devices are accessories that users can physically wear, such as a wristwatch or bracelet, that contain sensors 
to record users’ physical locations. While some wearable devices pair with a user’s smartphone in order to leverage 
its  GPS  capabilities,  other  devices  have  standalone  GPS  hardware  installed  in  them.  Wearable  GPS  data  may  be  
made accessible to downstream users by device makers or retained for sole use by the device makers for analytical 
purposes. 
Aerial imagery data:
Aerial  mobility  data  refers  to  data  collected  about  physical  movements  of  people  based  on  images  derived  from  
aerial photography. These images can be derived from means such as satellites and drones.
66
 Aerial imagery data 
can  be  used  to  better  understand  both  large  scale  population-level  trends—such  as  mapping  the  location  of  
human settlements where public census data is not available—as well finer grain analyses—such as counting the 
66. https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/national-geospatial-program/imagery 
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
34

number of vehicles in a parking lot of a given point of interest. Aerial imagery data collection poses unique privacy 
challenges in the location data space, since there are no clear opt-in or opt-out paths for the subjects of granular 
aerial photography. 
Vehicle GPS:
Vehicle  GPS  data  is  one  of  many  pieces  of  metadata  derived  from  telematics—the  collection  of  data  relating  to  a  
particular vehicle, including performance, maintenance status and location. Vehicle GPS data can be derived from 
portable  GPS  devices  that  users  install  in  their  vehicles  or  through  on-board  GPS  hardware  built  into  the  vehicle,  
itself. Vehicle GPS data can be distinguished into two categories: fleet and consumer. While fleet data is derived from 
commercial vehicles, such as long-haul trucks, consumer data is derived from passenger vehicles. Policies regarding 
data sharing and accessibility vary by automaker. 
Bluetooth:
A  signal  that  allows  for  short-range  wireless  communication  between  electronic  devices.
67
  Bluetooth  can  be  
used  to  determine  when  and  for  how  long  electronic  devices,  such  as  smartphones,  come  into  proximity  with  
other  bluetooth-enabled  devices.  Bluetooth  technology  may  be  used  to  collect  location  data  through  the  use  of  
“beacons,” devices that interact with bluetooth-enabled smartphones to serve messaging, such as advertising, or to 
collect information, such as number of visitors to a certain point of interest. The use of beacons for data collection 
generally does not provide users with a clear path to opt in or opt out from data collection, while other smartphone-
to-smartphone bluetooth-enabled applications do provide clear paths to opt-in and exercise data rights.
Geotagged Social Media Data
Data connected to videos, photographs, messages, and other content posted on social media containing information 
on the time and geographic location of the user.
68
67.    https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/2020-05-29_IF11559_f93c95d9673977192f24c0c149cbe28ca7f20e50.pdf 
68. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0261517716301005?casa_token=tLhh5zlgjhkAAAAA:tW51e5tF-juTplhzBx-
kuHsw2-1h79w-lFp_IHBBDh4cN_vaM5CGVd7zx2-uEr8tInGLnz-c  
35
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

8. Appendix 2: Data4Covid 
Mobility Repository: Taxonomy 
of Factors, Design Choices, and 
Variables
Data Collaborative Type: The operational model or collaboration mechanism enabling the project based on 
The GovLab’s typology of data collaboratives:
• 
Public Interfaces:  Companies provide open access to certain data assets, enabling independent uses of the 
data by external parties. 
• 
Trusted  Intermediary:  Third-party  actors  support  collaboration  between  private  sector  data  providers  and  
data users from the public sector, civil society, or academia. 
• 
Data  Pooling:  Companies  and  other  data  holders  agree  to  create  a  unified  presentation  of  datasets  as  a  
collection accessible by multiple parties.
• 
Research and Analysis Partnership:  Companies engage directly with public sector partners and share certain 
proprietary data assets to generate new knowledge with public value.
• 
Prizes & Challenges: Companies make data available to participants who compete to develop apps; answer 
problem statements; test hypotheses and premises; or pioneer innovative uses of data for the public interest 
and to provide business value.
• 
Intelligence Generation: Companies internally develop data-driven analyses, tools, and other resources, and 
release those insights to the broader public.
Value Proposition: Provides an explanation of the type of question the data project seeks to answer, from one 
of the following four categories: 
• 
Situational Awareness, how increased access to previously inaccessible information might enable stakeholders 
across sectors to better understand COVID-19 trends;
• 
Cause  and  Effect  Analysis,  attempts  to  better  understand  the  drivers  and  consequences  of  COVID-19  on  
public health, society, and the economy. They aim to establish which variables affect the pandemic. 
• 
Prediction, attempts to allow stakeholders to assess future risks, needs, and opportunities.
• 
Impact Assessment, attempts to determine which, whether, and how institutional interventions, such as new 
policies or services, affect disease spread or the pandemic’s secondary effects. 
Sector: A high-level bucketing of the Topic Areas above:
1. Public Health
2. Social 
3. Economic 
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
36

Scope: The range of physical area this data project intends to support:
• 
Local
• 
Regional
• 
National
• 
Multilateral
• 
Undefined
Data Supplier: All parties involved in providing data for the data project; this can include one or more of the 
following:
• 
Private Sector
• 
Civil Society
• 
Research/Academia
• 
General Public
• 
Public Sector
Data User: All parties using or benefitting from the data project; this can include one or more of the following:
• 
Private Sector
• 
Civil Society
• 
Research/Academia
• 
General Public
• 
Public Sector
• 
Journalistic Media
Outputs: The output of the data project; this can include one or more of the following:
• 
Data Repository / Portal 
• 
Data Dashboard / Visualization
• 
Static Reporting
• 
Mobile App 
• 
Analytics Platform
• 
User Tool 
• 
Data journalism
Mobility Data Type: Refers to the type of mobility data and its provenance. Its categories include:
• 
Call Detail Records “CDR” (Telco)
• 
XDR (Telco)
• 
First-Party SDK smartphone-derived GPS 
37
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive

• 
Third-Party SDK smartphone-derived GPS 
• 
BidStream Data
• 
Wearable GPS
• 
Aerial 
• 
Vehicle GPS
• 
Bluetooth
• 
Opt-in/Opt-out
• 
Opt-out only
• 
No explicit opt in or opt out
Data sharing privacy measures: 
• 
Aggregated 
• 
De-identified
• 
De-identified with noise
• 
On-premise federated
• 
Synthetic Mobility data
Region: The World Bank region the project sought to target. (For example, a project by the United Kingdom’s 
Cambridge University to improve disease detection in Malawi would sort into “Sub-Saharan Africa” and not 
“Europe and Central Asia”). Regions include: 
• 
East Asia and Pacific
• 
Europe and Central Asia
• 
Latin America and the Caribbean
• 
Middle East and North Africa
• 
North America
• 
Sub-Saharan Africa
• 
South Asia 
• 
Global
The Use of Mobility Data for Responding to the COVID19 Pandemic  |  DATA4COVID19 Deep Dive
38