

27/10/2022, 14:51Data portability and peer-to-peer accommodation: four scenarios for the future (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/data-portability-and-peer-to-peer-accommodation-four-scenarios-for-the-future-report/#1522943934045-d581c108-4c6e4817-d3b51/9
Data portability and peer-to-peer accommodation: four
scenarios for the future (report)
Mon Apr 9, 2018
Share
Data ethics and privacy
We’ve been exploring multiple scenarios of imagined futures to help us understand
how we move towards a world where people, organisations and communities use
data to make better decisions, and are protected against any of its harmful
impacts.
In its simplest form, data portability is the ability for someone to copy or move data
from one organisation to another. Although portability was originally intended as a
data protection right, our work in other sectors like banking, retail and telecoms
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:51Data portability and peer-to-peer accommodation: four scenarios for the future (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/data-portability-and-peer-to-peer-accommodation-four-scenarios-for-the-future-report/#1522943934045-d581c108-4c6e4817-d3b52/9
shows that it also has other benefits. It can help build competitive, complementary
and serendipitous services.
Portability is performed with the consent of the people or organisations who the
data is about. They decide which organisations they trust to get access to the data.
To provide an extra level of security, organisations may be vetted by a third party.
For example, the UK’s open banking standard, which allows bank customers to
give third party organisations access to bank account information, requires those
organisations to be on an Open Banking Register,  itself administered by the
Financial Conduct Authority.
Over time, data portability can become a new mechanism for data sharing. If good
open standards are developed then, despite the data portability right’s limitations,
sharing will become quick, easy and beneficial for some use cases. However, while
the new mechanism for data sharing can enable better services, healthy
competition and cooperation, it can also enable harmful activities or even dystopian
futures.
In our work we explored multiple scenarios of imagined futures to help us
understand how we move towards a world where people, organisations and
communities use data to make better decisions, and are protected against any of
its harmful impacts.
How we expanded our thinking on data portability to include
the peer-to-peer sector
To investigate the opportunities in the peer-to-peer sector we built a
multidisciplinary team which included people with experience in research, design,
communications, policy and technical development. We started with a few rounds
of research, including desk research on government interventions and user
research, with people who both rent and let properties on peer-to-peer platforms
and various other stakeholder groups in the sector.
Using the knowledge we gained from the research, we used design fiction practices
to start imagining and thinking about future scenarios. We asked ‘what would
happen if...’ questions to help us think beyond what is possible right now, and to
visualise different future worlds and services that could be made possible through
increased data portability.
For each scenario we debated the data being used, stakeholders, risks and
benefits, and the likelihood of it coming to pass.
Four scenarios for the future
We imagined four scenarios:

27/10/2022, 14:51Data portability and peer-to-peer accommodation: four scenarios for the future (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/data-portability-and-peer-to-peer-accommodation-four-scenarios-for-the-future-report/#1522943934045-d581c108-4c6e4817-d3b53/9
Holo-day
Holo-day – a virtual reality environment to help people make more informed
decisions on where to go on holiday. It would allow people to ‘visit’ a destination in
virtual reality to help them decide if a destination city or a room that someone was
letting met their needs
Read more about Holo-day
Reputation Barometer
“Hypr-local” bike tour
Data Baggage Tag
Conclusion

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario one: Holo-day – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55681/4
Scenario one: Holo-day
Share
Holo-day – a virtual reality environment to help people make more informed
decisions on where to go on holiday. It would allow people to ‘visit’ a destination in
virtual reality to help them decide if a destination city or a room that someone was
letting met their needs
Strap on your headset. Be there. Wake up in that dream holiday home, look around
the place as if you were there. Experience walking out into the neighbourhood, see
what the corner shop looks like, feel the atmosphere of the streets, interact with the
locals. Be there before you decide to go there.
What is it?
In this scenario we explored the concept of a virtual reality (VR) environment to
help people have better holidays.
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario one: Holo-day – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55682/4
A seamless mix of Street View tourism and the kind of 3D/360 ̊ virtual tours popular
in real estate, the product explored here helps people decide if a destination city or
a room that someone is letting will meet their needs.
It helps people answer questions such as “will I feel safe in this area?”, “will I enjoy
my holiday here?”, and “will my holiday companions and I be able to get into, or
move around in the property in a wheelchair?”. It does this by allowing them to take
a virtual tour both around an area and inside the properties that are available to let.
As people look around the area in the VR environment they can see tourist spots,
restaurants, sports activities and entertainment opportunities that suit their
interests. They can even see avatars representing the type of people who live in
the area walking around and enjoying their lives. Information on crime or other risks
in the area is also available.
They can see properties marked as being available for let and which online
platforms they are available through. People can take a virtual tour of properties to
see if they meet their needs. They can see if they have enough space for
themselves and their friends, or if there is good access for luggage, child buggies
or wheelchairs.
How does it work? How is it related to portability?
In this scenario, the core data powering Holo-day are photographs, layouts or 360 ̊
recordings of properties which Holo-day showcases.
We imagined that Holo-day was not a feature of a single accommodation platform
but a separate service that relied on data portability to access and use data about
the properties themselves – such as their exact location. The simulation can mesh
the view from inside with the exploration of the neighbourhood and the reputation of
the host based on letting history.
Holo-day is given permission to access data about the preferences of potential
groups of guests from their peer-to-peer accommodation platform accounts. These
preferences might be explicitly ported from their letting history on several
accommodation platforms by one or more guests, or derived from their behaviour
on other services. Holo-day could also request access to data from its users’ bank,
for example, providing data about their spending habits to help highlight activities
and retailers they might be interested in seeing through Holo-day.
In addition to data used through a portability framework, Holo-day will benefit from
a wealth of open data about the areas it covers: data about maps, addresses, and
points of interest; data about buildings and transport; demographic data to better
represent the local feel of the area; and data about local entertainment and
attractions. As a third party working across peer-to-peer accommodation platforms,
it also makes use of open data about the platforms and their products, including
pricing and T&Cs.

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario one: Holo-day – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55683/4
In order for Holo-day and similar services to work at scale, a cross-sector working
group may be needed to develop standards for shared and open data that could
then be applied globally.
National data regulators and policymakers will make required data such as
geospatial, transport and demographic data available. They will also consider –
from a regulatory perspective – what data should be openly available or kept
private in their domains.
There are different business models for Holo-day that could emerge. A community
model, perhaps built around existing communities like OpenStreetMap or Second
Life, is one option. Holo-day could also be built by the private sector: it is easy to
imagine how this could be an expansion of an existing service like Google’s
StreetView, but the possibility that the short-term letting platforms might offer the
service themselves is equally viable. Finally, in some countries or cities, the public
sector might offer the service, whether to show their cities in the way they want, or
because the market does not provide the service.
Benefits and risks
By offering a high-fidelity preview of the properties and their surroundings, Holo-day
aims to create a ‘no surprise’ service which should result in more renters going on
holidays that meet their needs and expectations, in turn creating a higher level of
customer satisfaction for the letters and platforms.
The ability to virtually visit properties can also improve the experience – and the
ability to travel comfortably and safely – for people with accessibility needs.
Finally, by meshing the appeal of properties and the local area together, such a
service creates new avenues for interaction between platforms and the localities
they operate in. This and other factors could lead to greater trust in the peer-to-peer
accommodation sector, leading to more use and growth.
There are some downsides  to consider.
Could there be a rise in virtual tourism with people not taking holidays in real-life
but instead only taking Holo-days? Could Holo-day become a vector for disaster
tourism, with people taking Holo-days in disaster zones? Would the high-fidelity
view of properties and their exact locations increase the risk of burglary, stalking or
espionage? Less serious, but rather creepily, people might create games that they
played in the Holo-day version of other people’s houses.
There may be a relative lack of usable data (or no data at all) for some areas,
leading to people only going on holiday to places with high-fidelity Holo-days. This
would lead to an increase in logistical pressure on popular spots, while places
without the capacity to gather such detailed data could suffer from a drop in visits.
Or would visitors be more attracted to areas that they couldn’t visit through virtual
reality?

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario one: Holo-day – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55684/4
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
The risk of data manipulation is worth exploring too. What if a host or letter shared
false information about a property? How acceptable would it be to ‘airbrush’ the
imperfections of a given property? And what if a local authority decided to publish
fake data to increase tourism?
How far in the future could this be?
This is technically feasible and seems fairly near-term. We suspect that some peer-
to-peer accommodation platforms and technology companies will already be
prototyping such ideas using the data they already hold.
Back to main pageNext scenario

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario two: Reputation Barometer – The ODI
https://theodi.org/knowledge-opinion/reports/scenario-two-reputation-barometer/1/5
Scenario two: Reputation Barometer
Share
Reputation Barometer – a service that measures and monitors an individual’s
standing by giving an overall score for their reputation. This reputation score would
be informed by behaviour renting or letting properties on peer-to-peer
accommodation platforms. It could be used by other users of the peer-to-peer
platform or services outside the sector to make decisions about whether and how
to interact with that person
From her home in Cape Town, Alice is preparing a trip from Edinburgh to Loch
Lomond and the Isle of Mull, a dream come true, and a chance to spend time with
some of her best friends from university days. She is browsing the EtherBedroom
app, looking for places to stay during her two nights stop in Oban. It’s close to the
date of her departure, but she’s relaxed. The prices look great, and she knows she
will be able to book any room as soon as she decide between the one-room in the
city centre with a free tour thrown in, or the gorgeous loft offering her a
personalised 40% discount.
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario two: Reputation Barometer – The ODI
https://theodi.org/knowledge-opinion/reports/scenario-two-reputation-barometer/2/5
She never used EtherBedroom before, but it doesn’t matter. Her Reputation
Barometer crosses borders, and her high score opens doors. Her near-perfect
reviews from SBB, the leading peer-to-peer accommodation platform across south
and west Africa, sure help. So does her employment record and the fact she has
accumulated plenty of loyalty points with Baimazon, the retail giant. Upon creating
her account with EtherBedroom, she simply had to click on “Barometer” as her
preferred reputation broker, and the Barometer did the rest. It queried records and
reputation scores across platforms similar to EtherBedroom – with Alice’s consent,
of course.
It’s a good thing Alice has a great score. Her friend Bob, who lives in Glasgow,
wouldn’t have been able to book her a room on EtherBedroom anyway.
Youthful indiscretions stick, over there, and while Bob is by all accounts an
upstanding citizen now, his use of most online platforms is heavily curtailed. He
knows how to work around it, of course. You learn those things fast, learn to use
the alternatives, the services where reputation management is not de rigueur yet,
the shady ones too. He tried fixing his record, to understand why his score was so
low. No luck.
Too much stress spending hours and days on the phone with Barometer or
TrueTrust, the two big providers in the UK. Neither would tell him whether it was the
heavy partying in his early twenties or an in-work/out-of-work career as
experimental artist that was the problem. Too much stress trying to fix it, anyway.
Life goes on. It’s the social networks he misses the most. His friends refuse to
connect with him in case his reputation damages theirs...
What is it?
In this scenario we explore a service that measures and monitors an individual’s
standing by giving an overall score for their reputation. Adopting and expanding
ideas from the credit scoring industry, as well as inspiration from popular culture
and recent news, we wanted to explore how data portability could enable new
forms of management of reputation in the peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
The reputation score given by our fictional Reputation Barometer, and other similar
services, is informed by the reviews received by an individual when renting or
letting properties on peer-to-peer accommodation platforms, but also by their
behaviour or reputation in other contexts, for example on other online services or in
their career.
Once calculated, a person’s reputation score can be used to make decisions by
other users of the peer-to-peer platform, or services outside this sector. In this
scenario, use of the barometer and score would be widespread, normal, and
expected.

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario two: Reputation Barometer – The ODI
https://theodi.org/knowledge-opinion/reports/scenario-two-reputation-barometer/3/5
We explored how the reputation could be represented, for example as a whole
number on a scale that ranges from 0 – 600. This ‘score’ is assigned to an
individual through the assessment of a number of data points, building a picture of
an individual’s trustworthiness.
An insights dashboard forms part of the Barometer. It offers insights into how your
score could be improved, how improvements would benefit you and your standing
in relation to the rest of society and your peers.
How does it work? How is it related to portability?
The core idea behind this scenario is that with widespread data portability, sharing
of data about individuals becomes easier as standards and interfaces are
developed to maturity. So much so that reputation and personal data on other
platforms can flow between each other.
In our scenario, a user who registers with a peer-to-peer accommodation platform
needs to bring their reputation score with them, fostering two-way trust from an
early point in their interactions on the platform. It works by prompting the user to
connect their chosen P2P rental platform account to their barometer, or vice-versa,
both in order to port their existing reputation to that platform, and so the barometer
can port data back from the platform.
Once consent is established, data ported between the accommodation platform
and the barometer includes reviews, history, and reputation data from other
platforms and services.
Through other data sharing mechanisms, the Reputation Barometer may include a
person’s criminal record, tax records, employment history, financial history and
current balance.
The system may also use existing open data, such as demographic and economic
statistics, to better gauge someone’s reputation in the context of their location and
background.
A cross-sector working group could be needed to develop standards for safely
sharing and determining a reputation score. Meanwhile civil society, businesses
and governments would need to consider the potential harms and need for updates
to legislation such as that to protect privacy and prevent discrimination.
Benefits and risks
Reputation becoming more portable means that it may be easier for people – in
their roles as service users or workers – to move between platforms. In a global
world, knowing who you can trust becomes easier.
The idea of quantifying reputation with a single score, however reductive, creates a
simple indicator of otherwise elusive, qualitative information. This is both a benefit

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario two: Reputation Barometer – The ODI
https://theodi.org/knowledge-opinion/reports/scenario-two-reputation-barometer/4/5
and a risk, because of how it hides complexity and nuance.
A feedback loop is created as reputation is used to determine the levels of service
provided to people. Those with higher reputations are likely to receive services from
those demanding higher reputations, which increases their reputations further,
while those with lower reputations are likely to be placed in situations where they
find it hard to succeed, further lowering their reputation. These feedback loops can
lead to stratification of society and widening inequalities.
In some variants of this scenario, we can suppose that data portability is no longer
used simply as a mechanism giving individuals protection and control, but a
requirement from states and corporations to participate in society. This then creates
a risk of control of population via the opaque workings of an algorithm that
calculates reputation.
Such opacity can then create, and hide, discrimination against specific groups of
people, whether deliberately or accidentally, via proxies implicit in the data. It could
negatively affect the more creative and challenging portions of society – such as in
art, comedy, acting and media – as reactions to people’s deliberately provocative
work as creators has negative impacts on those individuals’ lives as citizens.
All of this could result in an increase in anxiety and other mental illnesses due to
fear of your every action or mistake affecting your future.
How far in the future could this be?
This is hard to tell.
In some sense such systems already exist – in China or in western societies’ credit
score systems. Although the level of participation and co-operation of multiple
actors required to bring about the specific scenario we describe does feel remote,
some of us felt it might be inevitable because it was so easy to imagine.
That said, limiting the scope of a reputation system to the portability of data about a
user of a peer-to-peer accommodation platform to ‘seed’ their reputation in another
peer-to-peer accommodation platform does not feel far-fetched and could be
useful. It could be created through collaboration between existing platforms,
coupled with careful experimentation with how to make it fair and effective.
The harder part would be limiting the use of the data to this particular scenario and
preventing it from being used in other contexts where problems are more likely to
occur.

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario three: Hypr-local bike tours – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55731/4
Scenario three: Hypr-local bike tours
Share
“Hypr-local” bike tour – a bike that is preprogrammed with various tours people
can take through a holiday community. The tours are based on data provided by
the local community, hosts and renters, as well as the visitor’s own preferences
Hypr-local bikes are more than your usual cycle-sharing scheme. Adopted in 23
cities across the world, they are your gateway and your guide to visiting and
experiencing true local life.
All Hypr-local bikes come with a touch screen and – safety first – a voice-activated
assistant that will lead you through the best routes, pointing out hidden details and
telling you the unknown stories, all gleaned from the expert, intimate knowledge of
the local communities.
Each of the communities that live here would like to show you something special,
something unique, something they love and think you’ll love.  But don’t take our
word for it, take their word. The word on the street. The word of the street.
Knowledge & opinion > Blog >

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario three: Hypr-local bike tours – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55732/4
What is it?
In this scenario we explore how somebody might interact with a network of multiple
local community platforms, with the traditional peer-to-peer accommodation
platform operating as a broker of access and trust. In this scenario we imagine that
a visitor to an area could join a local network by porting their profile data to one or
many local platforms for the duration of their visit. During the visit the local
platforms would act as a tour guides, providing their own perspective on the area in
which they live and work.
We thought of how this guide could manifest itself, from an interactive map to a
device held in the hand or attached to a typical object found in areas travelers and
tourists may want to discover.
We settled for the idea of a cycling tour of the area they’re visiting, allowing them to
explore the different aspects of their temporary community. The tours are created
and curated to provide the guest with a different ‘slice’ of the community in a given
area: the Turkish community, the artist’s community, the young parent’s community,
etc.
How does it work? How is it related to portability?
This scenario shows a system that could complement – by way of data portability –
the existing peer-to-peer accommodation sector. It could also support other parts of
the tourism sector, like hotels.
We considered a number of data flows in this scenario. The central concept being
that the community is the local repository of data. For Hypr-local to work best,
people or businesses port data from local review platforms, whether they are
specialised for restaurants, or more generalist. Preferences and profiles for hosts
and guests are also ported – at the behest of the user – from peer-to-peer
accommodation platforms to the Hypr-local community for the duration of their stay,
allowing some personalisation of the guides based on accommodation location,
and taste predictions based on history.
This service also benefits from open data, such as maps, addresses, transport data
and other data key to the logistics of being and moving in an urban environment. It
makes use of other data (some of which may be open), including community based
notice boards and events listings.
Benefits and risks
Peer-to-peer accommodation platforms already act as brokers of trust. They vet the
identity of both guests and hosts for reasons of safety and to manage payments.
However, if the platform starts to suggest places/businesses to visit based on
recommendations from hosts and the platform’s product design decisions, there is
a risk of catering only to the kind of guests the platform and hosts would like to

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario three: Hypr-local bike tours – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55733/4
attract, which could ultimately distort local markets. What if instead platforms were
to devolve knowledge of the local area to the local community, which operates a
complementary community-based platform?
As a guest, I may appreciate that a P2P accommodation platform provides an
aggregated and consistent search interface, and that it stores my history, host
references, personal profile and preferences.
What if as a guest I could temporarily join local community platforms by porting my
preferences and profile to them? In this way I could explore a community before I
visit, and the people who live in a local area might give me recommendations
based both on my profile and what they would like to promote for an authentic and
community-enhancing experience.
Conversely, as a host I am motivated to use a peer-to-peer accommodation
platform as a broker of trust and to advertise my availability, but I may want to
associate myself primarily with a community platform and port information about
myself to one or more traditional peer-to-peer platforms. By simultaneously
participating in a hyper-local community platform, I hope to become more
connected to the members of the communities I am part of, and discover the other
communities with whom I share my neighbourhood.
We can also extend the idea of hosts to include local businesses, guides and
others who are passionate about their local area. Together they form a network of
intersecting and interacting communities on their own platform. They can port in
details from other platforms such as a register of independent businesses, although
ideally this would be available as open data.
This scenario comes with a number of benefits for a variety of actors in the
ecosystem. For instance:
Communities self-describe and paint their own picture of how they experience
their lives and see themselves
It frames a visit differently for prospective guests – people might feel like a
guest in a geographical community, not just a hotel or rented room in someone
else’s house
A hyper-local community is more likely to support small businesses and they
have the local knowledge to verify a business’s local credentials
Both guests and hosts are more aware of the richness of their local area   
A record of the profiles of visitors will form a community guest book
This platform becomes a (geographical) community resource of its own and
could be used by anyone who wants to explore a local area, not just platform
guests
The platform can focus on what it does best – matching guests to hosts,
adding new locations, and managing the transactions, while developing a
relationship with a community via complementary platforms

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario three: Hypr-local bike tours – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55734/4
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
We like to imagine this leads us to a future of better relationships between guests
and hosts and better inter-community understanding.
There may of course be risks and unintended consequences to such a service. If
the community platform can see and identify the visitor as a tourist they could
become a target for fraud, theft, suspicion or backlash.
The scheme as we explored it also relies heavily on the time, effort and goodwill of
local communities. Having communities self-declare could also make them targets
for harassment. Conversely, communities could choose to boycott a platform, or
make it difficult for visitors to an area to discover local amenities. And finally,
insufficient funding or time for the community to build and support the platform
might result in substandard – or even unsafe – guidance for visitors.
How far in the future could this be?
In theory the technology exists to do this now, although it would require some kind
of standard to enable data portability from the accommodation and review platforms
to this guiding service. It would also require support and funding for the community
platforms for it to work well.
Previous scenarioBack to main pageNext scenario

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario four: Data Baggage Tag – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55761/4
Scenario four: Data Baggage Tag
Share
Data Baggage Tag – data from services / platforms that people can carry around
on a physical device. When you stay at a property the services in that property,
such as smart thermostats, will be given access to data about you and adapt to
your preferences.
I step in through the front door – it’s nice, tastefully decorated. The lights are on full,
too bright, and the noise from the street is a little louder than the profile on
EtherBedroom suggested. It’s almost a home from home but not yet. I unclip my
baggage tag from my suitcase, and I tap it to the sensor on the wall just inside the
front door. Immediately the lights dim and my favourite music floats through the
integrated speaker system. I relax.
What is it?
Knowledge & opinion > Blog >

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario four: Data Baggage Tag – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55762/4
Here we looked at what literal data portability could mean: data from services and
platforms which you can carry around on a physical device, in this case a baggage
tag with the ability to record, store, and share on-demand data about your travels.
With such a device you could interact with other devices either in a rental property,
or terminals that can be found in public spaces throughout a city. Touching the tag
to specific devices and terminals shares data temporarily, and only at the point of
use.
The data stored on the tag acts as a reflection of its owner’s preferences, needs
and history. Potentially you could refine personal data about you so that it becomes
more representative and accurate.
In the context of short-term rentals and peer-to-peer accommodation, a key
function of this application of data portability is the ability for users to bring their
home settings with them to their rented accommodation and apply those same
settings upon arrival. Preferences could include your ideal temperature, light
settings, voice interaction settings, account details for streaming services, home
automation preferences – bringing your bubble with you.
We also explored the idea of a public terminal for similar applications. A physical
device that resides in public spaces in our cities, it acts as a focal point for the
dissemination of ‘personalised’ information about the local/wider area –
communicating relevant information to users based on the data on their tag.
How does it work? How is it related to portability?
Users could populate their portable device with data from the platforms of their
choosing. Augmenting it with personal data, some of which might be sensitive, and
decisions they’d like to remember.
This data collected from disparate sources can then be tended to by the user,
pruning, editing, deleting, adding elements. The user is empowered to take control
over this data and how it represents them.
The data/device is then carried on the user as a physical manifestation of their
digital self. It can be used to interact with other digital objects within the physical
world to aid the user in decision-making, pathfinding and general interactions, yet
leaving no trace behind.
Because the user can choose whatever they would like to curate or store on the
device, the possibilities for what data it stores are numerous but could include:
Physical preferences – for example temperature, light levels, walking pace
Entertainment preferences – for example music service account details, “how i
like my coffee”, etc.
Web search history
Medical history
Purchase history

27/10/2022, 14:51Scenario four: Data Baggage Tag – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55763/4
Benefits and risks
Exploring this scenario, we were intrigued by how this baggage tag might become a
medium by which user preferences for a multitude of things may be literally carried
around – how you like your coffee, your home automation settings, music playlists,
etc. The baggage tag won’t resolve differences between groups of travellers though
– human interaction would still be needed.
The concept of the tag seemed to come with convenience and consistency: by
carrying your history and preferences all the time, it voids the need to reset your
environment everywhere you go. An added convenience would be if the public
terminals could double as knowledge resources for the area.
This disaggregation from the platforms where these preferences are typically stored
points to a number of interesting benefits, including a greater control over personal
data. It also may lead to a greater understanding of data sharing: by making data
more tangible, and sharing a physical activity rather than something one has to
pursue within complicated settings in a software environment, the device can help
us get a better grasp of what data about us gets used, shared and stored, when,
and how.
On the other hand, without significant yet easy mechanisms for authentication of
the user, this scenario raises serious privacy and security concerns if the tag were
to be lost. Variants of this scenario, where data can be exchanged through
contactless methods, could lead to fraudulent skimming of data from devices
hanging from luggage, and even identity theft.
Another risk is that, by virtue of the tag storing and providing access to extensive,
rich data, it could lead to services collecting more data than they need, abusing the
lack of granularity of how the data is requested and shared from the baggage tag.
Finally, we foresee a risk that such technology might isolate us from the world,
leaving us in an echo chamber: this ability to take your bubble with you everywhere
would mean even less chance for serendipity or ever being placed slightly outside
your comfort zone.
How far in the future could this be?
Technically speaking, this is achievable today. Indeed, almost all of the capabilities
we ascribed to the data tag could be replicated through software on smartphones,
although it is always worth noting that smartphone ownership is not universal, even
in rich societies.
Whether for a physical tag or for apps, realising the benefits of this scenario while
avoiding its risks requires developing new sharing standards, and addressing
privacy and security issues.

27/10/2022, 14:52Conclusion: The future is not determined – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55791/3
Conclusion: The future is not determined
Share
Here’s our conclusion on the scenarios we explored 
We felt that each of the scenarios we explored was technically possible and that
there would be viable business models for organisations offering these services,
but there were things that might stop them emerging easily, for example whether
data stewards – the people who hold data – decide to work together to make the
data they hold portable to an open standard, or whether regulators intervene to
force them do so. These echoed the limitations to data portability that we have
seen in other sectors and contexts.
We could also see risks in each scenario. A badly built Holo-day might lead to
disaster tourism, with people getting pleasure from virtually experiencing other
people’s discomfort. The Hypr-Local bike tour could lead to identikit holidays with
everyone touring the same few tourist traps. All of this could damage local
economies although, perhaps, some local communities might enjoy corralling
tourists into one place.
The Reputation Barometer caused most internal debate
At the ODI we are strongly in favour of individuals having more control over data
about them. We believe that data should be used to make more and better
decisions, but everyone needs to be careful with the type of futures that can be
created by and for societies. People, organisations and societies that end up being
driven by data and making all of their decisions by ‘clever algorithms’ might be
efficient and convenient for some, but could also lead to flawed, ineffective and
unfair societies for others.
The Reputation Barometer envisioned a society in which the services people
received were determined by the reputation scores other people give them. It is a
scenario familiar to viewers of the Black Mirror episode Nosedive. In such a society,
people, businesses and governments might expect, or even demand, to see
reputation data when making decisions.
Would it be fair that a bad rating on a sharing economy platform could damage your
ability to rent a flat for the long term or get a job? How would you understand or
appeal the decisions? Would you even know if an organisation was making a
decision about you using bad data or a dumb algorithm? Would you be able to
change your mind about giving those organisations access to data about you and
tthitifiit?Obblttbddt?
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:52Conclusion: The future is not determined – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55792/3
stop those organisations from using it? Or be able to correct bad data?
Data needs a stronger human element
A system based on reputation data might be what some societies want and decide
to build. Some say China’s social credit system is heading in that direction, or that
Western society’s credit score systems will do the same. But we believe that many
societies will choose to have a stronger human element.
This will start with a clear rights framework. This framework will include strong
regulators and protections in favour of privacy, against discrimination and in support
of innovation. Organisations who deliver services will include ethical considerations
and good design practices in their processes. Human decisions – with all of their
own flaws and biases and moral dilemmas – will improve by virtue of being
informed by data, with support from consumer organisations, well-designed ethical
services, and regulators as a backstop.
Monitoring progress towards good outcome
It is still hard for us to monitor the effects of data portability and whether, despite all
of our efforts, we will still end up with adverse outcomes. That might be due to
accidents or malicious actors. Once data is shared between organisations it can be
copied and it becomes ever harder to understand who has access to it and how it is
being used.
Despite these difficulties, societies – and particularly policymakers – will need to
learn how to monitor and respond to the effects of data portability, both in terms of
the benefits and the harmful impacts. This monitoring will need to include being
open about how personal data is being used as well as how equitably the benefits
are spread. It will be necessary to help societies shape technological progress to
deliver the outcomes they decide on.
If harmful impacts occur, and trust in data starts to be lost, then we can imagine
stronger government intervention across the world. Building from our example of
reputation data, perhaps reputation will become what the UK calls a ‘protected
characteristic’, with warning signals and inspection measures in place to check that
organisations are only using reputation under certain conditions.
At the extreme there could be a public backlash that takes us into a ‘data
wasteland’. People might withdraw permissions for data about them to be used,
even for public good. As individuals restrict their privacy settings, we risk adding
bias into what might otherwise have been useful datasets. In some countries,
controls may be put in place that increasingly limit researcher and business access.
This could unnecessarily inhibit the potential of data portability to create more
effective and efficient services and a fairer data ecosystem for us all.
Building a better and more open future
Thtdbtdthildhd

27/10/2022, 14:52Conclusion: The future is not determined – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55793/3
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
The team debated these issues long and hard.
Our consensus was that the future we glimpsed was as scary as it was full of the
potential to make things better. We think that a future more informed by data will be
better for governments, businesses and people. We think that a future in which
people can move and share data between platforms and services has many
benefits: such as more choice, more access to more efficient and effective services,
and a thriving economy. We can also see there are risks of harmful impacts and
even dystopian possibilities.
The work of the Open Data Institute, and other organisations, needs to help
achieve the many benefits while heading off the risks. Our innovation programme,
which both this project and our recent exploration of data portability in the telecoms
sector with IF have been part of, helps with this work.
We are about to start another project in that programme looking at different ways to
widen access to data while retaining trust, and we are also starting more data
portability projects for business and governments.
If you want to talk about the issues raised in this post or work with us to use data to
help build a better future, get in touch at policy@theodi.org.
GET IN TOUCH IF YOU'D LIKE TO DISCUSS OUR RESEARCH WITH US
Get in touch