

 

 
 
Contents 
Background4 
Key findings5 
Pillar 1 (Event 1) | Foundations: ensuring data is fit for purpose5 
Pillar 2 (Event 2) | Skills: data skills for a data-driven economy and data-rich lives5 
Pillar 3 (Event 3) | Availability: ensuring data is appropriately accessible6 
Pillar 4 (Event 4) | Responsibility: driving safe and trusted use of data6 
Pillar 1 (Event 1) | Foundations: ensuring data is fit for purpose8 
Introduction8 
Opening remarks8 
Discussion9 
Fixing the plumbing9 
Investment, cost and value9 
Types of data9 
Institutions10 
Enforcing standards10 
Publishing data10 
Public attitudes1​0 
Challenges and solutions exercise11 
Breakout group A: How do we tackle the cultural and coordination barriers to 
good quality data?11 
Breakout group B: What needs to be done to resolve the long-running problems 
of legacy IT and broader data infrastructure? And how can we drive better data 
discoverability in government?12 
Breakout group C: What should a cross-departmental governance mechanism 
with the authority to enforce standards across government look like? How do we 
drive aligned governance structures across government?1​3 
General comments15 
Pillar 2 (Event 2) | Skills: data skills for a data-driven economy and data-rich lives16 
Background16 
Setting out the challenge16 
Proposals for addressing these challenges17 
Pillar 3 (Event 3) | Availability: ensuring data is appropriately accessible19 
Background19 
Open data19 
Shared models for deriving value from data20 
International data availability and collaboration21 
Debrief by government attendees22 
Pillar 4 (Event 4) | Responsibility: driving safe and trusted use of data23 
Background23 
Realising transparency and strengthening accountability23 
Public sector registers24 
Additional points to note25 
Data regulation and innovation2​5 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 2 

 
Better, not more, data2​6 
What’s missing or needs development to deliver responsible data?2​7 
Define clearer outcomes2​7 
Data is not responsible, people are2​7 
Public engagement28 
Value stance28 
Further topics discussed29 
Synthetic data29 
International data transfers29 
Digital IDs29 
Resources and examples mentioned during the event3​0 
About us3​1 
About the Ada Lovelace Institute3​1 
About the Centre for Public Data32 
About the Institute for Government3​2 
About the Open Data Institute33 
About the Royal Statistical Society33 
 
 
 
  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 3 

 
Background 
 
The National Data Strategy was launched for consultation on 9 September 2020. 
 
In response, the ​Ada Lovelace Institute​, the ​Centre for Public Data​, the ​Institute for 
Government​, the ​Open Data Institute​, and the ​Royal Statistical Society​ worked in 
partnership to convene a series of events focusing on developing recommendations for 
the implementation of the National Data Strategy for the public good. The aim of this 
series of events was to coordinate input, feedback and constructive recommendations 
for the UK government about how the goals of the National Data Strategy can best be 
implemented for the public good, in pursuit of aims of encouraging growth and 
innovation while also protecting and empowering people using the tools of ethics, good 
governance and regulation.  
 
The ​‘Getting data right’​ series analysed the four Pillars of the National Data Strategy, 
and convened conversations amongst experts and practitioners about how these 
themes could best be addressed and realised practically and sustainably. 
 
Pillar 1 (Event 1) | ​Foundations: ensuring data is fit for purpose 
Pillar 2 (Event 2) | ​Skills: data skills for a data-driven economy and data-rich lives 
Pillar 3 (Event 3) | ​Availability: ensuring data is appropriately accessible 
Pillar 4 (Event 4) | ​Responsibility: driving safe and trusted use of data 
 
We are indebted to all the participants in these events, and in particular the invited 
speakers whose presentation insights and expertise have informed this joint event 
summary note: 
 
·       Seb Bacon (EBM Datalab, University of Oxford) 
·       Stephen Blackburn (Leeds City Council) 
·       Lynn Currie (ICO) 
·       Phil Earl (DCMS) 
·       Ben Goldacre (University of Oxford) 
·       Joshua Harris-Kirkwood (DCMS) 
·       Dr Kristina Irion (Institute for Information Law) 
·       Jesper Lund (IT Pol) 
·       Raegan MacDonald, (Mozilla) 
·       Rosalie Marshall (Data Standards Authority) 
·       Emma McCoy (Imperial College London) 
·       Ricky McGowan (RSS) 
·       Dr Sanjay Sharma (Brunel University) 
·       Mathias Vermeulen (AWO) 
·       Jim Weatherall (AstraZeneca) 
·       Sharon Witherspoon (Academy of Social Sciences) 
 
This report is a summary of the discussion and does not necessarily reflect the views of 
the speakers. 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 4 

 
Key findings 
These are some of the key ideas and themes that emerged in the discussions. 
Pillar 1 (Event 1) | Foundations: ensuring data is fit for purpose 
This event was led by the Institute for Government. 
●A focus on data foundations is welcome: government needs to ‘fix the 
plumbing’ rather than being distracted by shiny technology.​ The other 
pillars will matter little if data foundations are not properly built and supported. 
Although there is growing recognition of this inside government, there is still 
sometimes a lack of ministerial understanding of how much work needs to be 
done on the basics. 
●Fixing data foundations will require long-term investment and 
maintenance.​ How much does not fixing the plumbing cost government and 
society? At the same time, while framing questions in financial terms and 
particularly ‘market failure’ has its uses (especially in talking to HM Treasury), it 
could obscure wider benefits and opportunities. 
●Government must properly engage the public.​ ​Public sector organisations 
must be aware of the sensitivities in using data, especially citizens’ personal 
data. If government wants to make more use of citizens’ data, it must bring the 
public with it and be clear and honest about policy goals and trade-offs. 
Pillar 2 (Event 2) | Skills: data skills for a data-driven economy and 
data-rich lives 
This event was led by the Royal Statistical Society. 
●Data skills are valued by a wide range of employers across all sectors. ​It 
is important not just to focus on the growing demand for workers with specialist 
data skills and to ensure that people from a wide range of backgrounds are 
given the opportunity to develop these skills. This might mean: reintroducing 
something like AS-Level mathematics to increase the number of people taking 
maths past GCSE level and training teachers in all subjects so that they are 
comfortable in teaching data skills that are relevant to their particular subject. 
●There is a need for greater collaboration between universities and 
industry to produce graduates with appropriate skills. ​This could be done 
by encouraging joint appointments for people to work at the interface of industry 
and academia. Which would require research councils to recognise diverse 
outputs so that this career path is properly valued. 
●Career pathways for people with data skills could be improved in, eg, 
operational research. ​To take the NHS as an example, this employs a large 
number of people with data skills to analyse things like waiting lists and where 
there is need for new services – but these roles are classified as admin/clerical 
and they lack career pathways and opportunities for advancement. These roles 
should be properly classified as scientific/technical and leadership training 
should be provided. 
● ​It is important to develop a professional framework for data scientists 
with shared codes of practice. ​Part of this means professional accreditation 
for people working in this area to help establish professional standards for data 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 5 

 
science. This is the objective behind the Royal Statistical Society’s new Data 
Analyst accreditation. 
Pillar 3 (Event 3) | Availability: ensuring data is appropriately 
accessible 
This event was led by the Open Data Institute. 
 
●The UK has a real opportunity to ensure that data is made more open and 
accessible, so that its benefits can be felt in every corner of society while 
ensuring people, communities and our environment are protected from harms. 
To achieve these opportunities, ​the UK will need an appropriate and 
workable framework built on open standards and open data where 
possible; transparency; clear and honest communication; ethics; public 
engagement and understanding; and good governance.  
●For data accessibility to function well, new methods of governance may 
be required. ​An approach such as data institutions, which are based on 
independent governance and oversight, may prove to be necessary and 
welcome in order to develop trust between all parties. 
●It should be recognised that ​sharing data can have an impact at both the 
individual and corporate level, and can potentially exacerbate 
asymmetrical distributions of power or opportunities.  
●The challenges and considerations relating to sharing data are, in many 
cases, human and cultural factors rather than technical. ​People must be 
given the necessary skills to use data with confidence. An appreciation of the 
value of sharing data must be engendered at all levels of an organisation.  
●It is vital that​ data is considered as part of any government procurement 
contract ​and that this covers how the data will be collected, stored and made 
appropriately accessible and interoperable, and that this is sufficiently funded for 
the long term.  
●The ​importance of developing local, bottom-up data sharing projects 
was emphasised​. The local level is often where the greatest societal benefit 
can be realised and, perhaps more importantly, where the benefits can be 
directly felt. It is critical that local authorities are empowered to act in the public 
interest and protect public benefits. 
●The issue of public permissions must be addressed. People often share data 
freely with companies but not with government. ​Government must be clear 
about the purpose of sharing data, explain the risks and then deliver on 
promises while demonstrating good practice​. 
Pillar 4 (Event 4) | Responsibility: driving safe and trusted use of 
data 
This event was led by the Ada Lovelace Institute. 
 
●A commitment to greater government transparency is welcomed but will 
need development to create meaningful understanding. ​Any transparency 
mechanism should be designed with different user groups in mind (publics, 
regulators, researchers, for example), and the proposed national engagement 
campaign on the societal benefits of the use of data must explicitly build in 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 6 

 
participatory structures for citizens to be involved in scrutiny and 
decision-making.  
●Transparency mechanisms must cover a full evaluation of the 
sociotechnical system around an algorithm​, including explicit articulation 
of values being propagated through the systems. Models to consider include 
Helsinki and Amsterdam’s algorithmic registers.  
●However well designed, transparency mechanisms do not equal 
accountability​: commitments to strengthen accountability need to be built 
into the National Data Strategy more explicitly. Options discussed for 
strengthening accountability include expanded requirements for fuller public 
‘umbrella’ impact assessment to include data protection, algorithmic, 
equalities and human rights impact assessments combined into a single 
process.  
●The National Data Strategy needs to get more specific on which values 
or ethics it is scaffolding its approach around​, including clarity as to why it 
is prioritising those values, and acknowledgement of trade-offs. To ensure 
ethics translates into practice, legislation could set precise public policy 
goals that all parties need to meet, for example to protect against 
discrimination, health misinformation or election manipulation, and encourage 
a shift from a ‘Can I build it?’ to a ‘Should I build it?’ approach.  
●The National Data Strategy should put more focus on securing the social 
benefits that the data protection legislation offers​. For example, data 
protection impact assessments (DPIAs) offer the possibility to work upstream 
from products brought to the market, and eliminate potential harms from the 
start. A risk-based approach to innovation and leveraging data protection by 
design and default allows us to secure the social benefits of technological 
developments and upstream interventions. Participants warned that the UK 
should not move away from data rights under the rule of law, in favour of 
codes or ethics or self-regulatory principles.  
●Regulators can, however, be further supported to ensure the processes, 
tools and templates needed to clarify responsibilities and equip 
organisations to innovate effectively and compliantly are robust.​ Clear 
guidance that organisations can emulate and adapt with confidence is not 
consistently in place. Greater collaboration between regulators (which might 
require additional resourcing) could be improved, as well as developing 
sandboxes to go beyond working with individual businesses, one at a time.  
●The National Data Strategy could be an opportunity to shift the paradigm 
towards better data rather than more data​, by making long-term 
investments to tackle real research challenges around creating technologies 
that are leaner and more responsible: incorrect and bad-quality data is 
cumbersome and costly, reducing productivity and blocking development.  
 
 
A detailed summary of each event is below. 
 
 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 7 

 
Pillar 1 (Event 1) | Foundations: ensuring data is fit 
for purpose 
Introduction 
The​ ​Institute for Government​ roundtable focused on ‘data foundations’. The National 
Data Strategy uses the term to mean data that is: 
‘​fit for purpose, recorded in standardised formats on modern, 
future-proof systems and held in a condition that means it is 
findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable.’ 
But, as the Strategy also says, at present: 
‘data is not consistently managed, used or shared in a way that 
facilitates informed decision-making or joint working across 
government and the wider public sector. Data remains 
undervalued and underexploited.’ 
This is true of government at all levels and different parts of the public sector, but it may 
also be true of other parts of society and the wider economy. 
This roundtable considered what could be done about these problems, how to 
overcome the cultural and other barriers to better data, how to ‘fix the plumbing’ of data 
infrastructure, how to solve long-standing problems like legacy IT, and what good 
governance and enforcement of standards should look like (and indeed, whether these 
are the right questions and this the right starting point). 
It opened with some opening remarks from public servants working on data foundations 
at different levels of government, followed by a wider discussion with attendees mainly 
drawn from government and civil society. This was followed three breakout groups, each 
considering particular challenges drawn from the National Data Strategy and attempting 
to find solutions: 
●Breakout group A: How do we tackle the ​cultural and coordination barriers 
to good quality data? 
●Breakout group B: What needs to be done to resolve the long-running problems 
of ​legacy IT​ and broader data infrastructure? And how can we drive better ​data 
discoverability​ in government? 
●Breakout group C: What should a cross-departmental ​governance ​mechanism 
with the authority to enforce standards across government look like? How do we 
drive aligned governance structures across government? 
Opening remarks 
After a number of years of decreasing momentum, participants agreed that data has 
raced up the agenda in recent months. ‘Data’ was already something this government 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 8 

 
was focused on (for example, the creation of a new data science unit at 10 Downing 
Street), but the coronavirus pandemic has made clear just how critical the effective use 
of data is. Some argued that the coronavirus response represented a high watermark in 
the use and sharing of data, while others were quick to point out the failures, including 
around test and trace and a lack of sharing with local authorities. All acknowledged, 
though, that the crisis had created a burning platform, giving a renewed sense of 
urgency to government’s efforts to use data better. 
What the framework National Data Strategy refers to as ‘Data Foundations’ lie at the 
heart of this. If government cannot get the basics right – tackling problems with access 
to data, data management and architecture, standards, capability, literacy and more – 
the other pillars of the strategy are redundant.  
Discussion 
Fixing the plumbing 
Participants were keen to stress that there is still an enormous amount of work to do in 
this area. Some pointed to a lack of ministerial understanding of how much basic work 
remains to be done in departments, with ministers distracted by the idea of shiny new 
technologies and failing to recognise the urgent need to invest in getting the basics right 
first. There are indications that this is beginning to change, with a growing appreciation of 
the need to ‘fix the plumbing’, even at the highest levels of government and beyond the 
usual data and digital circles. But participants were still keen for the Strategy to push this 
line more. This requires honesty about the nature of investment (see below), and a need 
to focus on bringing in and using the right skills in government, and to think about 
long-term maintenance. 
Investment, cost and value 
There were concerns, too, about how the question of investment is framed. Some felt 
that not enough had been done to work out how much failing to get the ‘data 
foundations’ right costs government and society, on the grounds that having a better 
sense of this should help quantify the costs and opportunities and drive further and faster 
action. At the same time, there was pushback against the idea that more needed to be 
done to identify existing instances of ‘market failure’, where not capitalising on the full 
value of data was resulting in missed opportunities for growth, jobs, R&D and more. A 
number of attendees felt that while a ‘market failure’ framing might appeal to HM 
Treasury, it was too narrow, making it difficult to talk about areas where government 
could usefully create new markets for wider public benefit through the better use of data. 
They stressed that more thought needed to be given to what it will be important for a 
digital state to do in future, and how data can be used to help. 
Types of data 
Participants were also concerned that some data types risked being overlooked in any 
future work, given the current scope of the Strategy. The management of the trillions of 
words that government produces in documents and emails every year, for instance, is 
not currently a focus for government, despite its fundamental importance to effective 
knowledge management and collaboration: generalists think it is a problem for the data 
people, and the data people think it has little to do with them.  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 9 

 
Not all types of data are the same and therefore cannot be treated the same. The use of 
data has to be situated in context – the communities involved, the purpose of the data, 
the trade-offs involved. 
Institutions 
While government can do data well, people felt that this was particularly true where there 
was an authority (such as the Met Office or Companies House) with responsibility for 
aggregating the data held by organisations and publishing it consistently. Attendees 
pointed out that the much-lauded publication of London public transport data by TfL, for 
example, was a relatively straightforward task since this only involved one organisation 
publishing to agreed standards, whereas making similar data for the north of England 
open would require coordinating between many local authorities that collect and process 
data in different ways. Currently, in many cases, it is unclear who is responsible for 
bringing together these data sets, and what authority they have to compel others to work 
with them. 
The new Data Standards Authority is beginning to fill this gap, to an extent, by working to 
ensure a common understanding of how we describe, store, query, reference and 
transmit data in the public sector. This should help government and other parts of the 
public sector understand whether data is fit for purpose, reuse data, join up services and 
better analyse data for improved policy outcomes. This work is only just getting 
underway, with the DSA focusing currently on three priority categories (out of 15 to 18 
they have identified). Setting those priorities is a challenge in itself, but there is much 
further to go, with participants highlighting future hurdles to overcome around applying 
standards to data held in legacy IT systems, and making standards consistent over many 
years to allow for longitudinal analysis, for instance. 
Enforcing standards 
Agreed standards will certainly help, but it is currently unclear how they will be enforced. 
Attendees observed that changes in the law may be required: it was felt that the failure of 
the GDS registers programme, for example, was partly attributable to the fact that 
departments had no legal obligation to maintain them. Even then, though, it can be 
difficult to make sure that departments meet their obligations – as we have seen with 
declining rates of departmental FoI response rates in recent years. Clearer lines of 
accountability within departments and other public sector organisations are likely to be 
necessary to ensure work to strengthen the data foundations is carried out, ideally with a 
government Chief Data Officer at the head. 
Publishing data 
There was some discussion of what being open even looks like for the public sector in 
2020 and beyond. Publishing csv files is positive and might help join up work and lay 
some stronger data foundations across organisations, but it will be lost on most of the 
population. A number of attendees felt that as well as focusing on the internal 
management of data, and its publication where possible, more attention should be paid 
to the presentation of that data, making it more easily accessible for members of the 
communities it relates to. 
Public attitudes 
This raised the question of public attitudes more broadly. Recent examples (such as the 
sharing of test and trace data with police authorities) have highlighted the sensitivities of 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 10 

 
sharing data between particular organisations at particular times, and for particular 
reasons. There was broad consensus around the urgent need to use data more 
effectively, with substantial investments required in data foundations to enable better 
data sharing and use now. But participants also stressed the need for public sector 
organisations to be mindful of these sensitivities. Government needs to act, but to act 
effectively it must bring the public with it. This includes clarity about policy goals and 
honesty about the trade-offs that might be involved – something some participants felt 
could be brought out more strongly by the National Data Strategy. 
Challenges and solutions exercise 
Breakout group A: How do we tackle the cultural and coordination barriers to 
good quality data? 
 
[​original image viewable here​] 
The breakout session on cultural and coordination barriers focused heavily on issues of 
understanding and clarity. 
A lack of understanding of the legal context for collecting, processing and sharing data, 
for example, was seen as a key barrier to using it effectively. With officials wary of – and 
strongly incentivised to avoid – making mistakes and lacking a strong understanding of 
what is and is not legal under GDPR and other regulations, many are overly cautious 
when handling data. 
Attendees felt that this lack of understanding extended beyond the law, with 
responsibility for managing data often falling to non-technical officials who don’t fully 
appreciate the potential power of data and understand the nuances of how to work with 
it effectively. Officials are not helped by poorly designed systems that make working with 
data a struggle, rather than supporting best practice (see Breakout group B for more). In 
other cases, data is seen solely as the responsibility of technical ‘data’ people, despite its 
relevance for work across government, leading to a disconnect between people who are 
collecting and processing data and those that are working with it. Worse still, in many 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 11 

 
instances it is not even clear who owns a given dataset, and whose responsibility it is to 
maintain it. 
A lack of understanding was also seen to characterise the attitudes of many senior 
officials and ministers. Participants felt that they too often see data as a ‘background’ 
task rather than a core element of effective government – although there are indications 
that this might be changing. They lack an appreciation of how difficult data can be to get 
right, looking for quick fixes for the symptoms rather than addressing the causes of 
problems with the use of data in government. This reflects a broader trend (with the 
framework National Data Strategy an example) of discussions about data in government 
being presented as ‘win-wins’ – all opportunity with no trade-off. While taking this line 
might help interest senior figures in data in the immediate term, attendees felt that it 
would ultimately prove counterproductive as the extent of the work and the difficulty of 
the decisions required to strengthen government’s data foundations becomes apparent. 
As well as greater honesty, there was a strong emphasis on the need for improved 
guidance to help overcome some of these issues. Translating DCMS advice on 
managing data into easy-to-follow processes for officials and frontline workers, for 
instance, would help those at ‘the coal-face’ grappling with questions of legality and 
unwieldy systems. A stronger overview of the cross-government data landscape and the 
lifecycle of key datasets would also help with assigning responsibility for data 
management, while offering an insight into ways of joining up the work of technical 
specialists and non-experts more effectively. 
Breakout group B: What needs to be done to resolve the long-running problems 
of legacy IT and broader data infrastructure? And how can we drive better data 
discoverability in government? 
 
[​original image viewable here​]  
Government data is often stored in large, outsourced systems. The data in these 
systems can be difficult to access – attendees complained that while third parties might 
share the data on request, they sometimes refuse to share meta-data – and the data that 
is shared is formatted differently for each system, making it difficult to move data around 
government and join up datasets. 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 12 

 
The data that is extracted is then typically put in an Excel spreadsheet to be emailed 
round, making effective processing difficult (there was some discussion of​ ​the recent 
Public Health England Excel incident​) and leading to issues with information 
management as different versions circulate. This reliance on Excel is driven by a number 
of factors: departments use Excel by default because people know how to use it and 
using a different tool would require training; security concerns mean that officials are 
often only given ‘locked down’ computers with Excel and no access to other tools; and 
people have been using Excel for so long that they do not even know that better tools 
exist. 
Participants had a number of recommendations to help address these issues. When it 
comes to procurement, they argued that government should reserve the right to access 
data stored in systems according to pre-agreed standards and remove the data if that is 
not happening. They felt that digital people should be more involved (and more willing to 
get involved) in procurement discussions, making sure that those making decisions 
properly understand what is required. A better training offer for those involved in 
procuring digital systems and for civil servants working with providers after procurement 
– as well as improved training to enable officials to move beyond Excel when processing 
data – was proposed. 
They also argued for changes to improve data discoverability more broadly. As with 
Breakout group A, they felt that a better understanding of what data government holds, 
where and in what format, would be massively beneficial, suggesting that database 
schemas be made public by default. There was some emphasis on making better use of 
APIs and registers (making them less authoritative and more ‘declarative’, to help give 
context for how departments see things). And they stressed the need to be careful with 
the design of systems being built now – starting with the backend, ensuring robust data 
models are being used – since these will become the legacy systems of the future.  
Breakout group C: What should a cross-departmental governance mechanism 
with the authority to enforce standards across government look like? How do 
we drive aligned governance structures across government? 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 13 

 
 
 
[​original image viewable here​]  
Much of the discussion around governance focused on a longstanding cultural barrier: 
the fear of failure in the civil service. Being open about existing failures and promoting a 
culture of ‘learning from mistakes’ would lessen the fear, but needed buy-in from the top 
of departments. Failures could, conversely, be a sign of some success – a department 
reporting breaches would show they could recognise them, while a department with 
none might be missing serious problems. 
Another way of ameliorating the ‘fear of failure’ would be to involve the public and 
stakeholders throughout. Public deliberation could lower the stakes by ensuring broad 
buy-in, but this was likely to slow things down. There was also a discussion of trust in 
this context, and a focus on earning and not expecting trustworthiness (as explored by 
the philosopher Onora O’Neill​). How to design for democratic accountability was also 
raised. 
There was also discussion of where authority came from – the importance of getting 
Cabinet support and placing obligations on them was discussed – and how to make 
obligations stick, whether statutory or non-statutory. Most of this discussion focused on 
carrots – rewards, building culture and networks – rather than sticks – embarrassment, 
regulatory bodies. 
The need to distinguish between different types of data (‘data is not a blob’) and situate 
discussion of it in context – at local level, rather than in national campaigns – was 
another theme. Additionally, thinking about exactly what data was required to solve a 
particular problem was more useful (especially in perennial problems of 
cross-government working and satisfying stakeholders) than asking for all the data, all 
the time. 
A set of principles and good examples of data governance (including the work of the 
National Data Guardian) would be helpful. Such principles could include transparency 
and being based on evidence but also include more practical guidance, such as 
including external members as part of governance mechanisms. 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 14 

 
As with other breakout groups, some basic steps (such as government knowing what 
data it held) would support better governance (for example, a better understanding of 
risk in taking decisions through knowing what data was already available).  
General comments 
 
[​original image viewable here​]  
  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 15 

 
Pillar 2 (Event 2) | Skills: data skills for a 
data-driven economy and data-rich lives  
Background 
The National Data Strategy recognises that there is a growing demand for workers with 
specialist data skills. The Royal Society, in their 2019 report, ​Dynamics of Data Science 
Skills​, commissioned labour market analysis has shown that demand for specialist data 
skills had increased by 231% over the previous five years. 
This is true across all sectors and industries: the importance of data skills is recognised 
by a wide variety of employers. Having these skills enriches understanding of individual, 
social and economic behaviours and is crucial in helping people to assess risk and make 
judgements. The current government has recognised this by indicating that it is placing a 
greater emphasis on making use of data analytical skills within the civil service. 
There is also demand in the private sector for robust data scientists who can not just do 
the data engineering, but who can understand all the ethical ramifications of different 
kinds of data exploitation, and who can communicate the essentials of a complex data 
analysis to non-statistical experts – meaning that there is an appetite for employees with 
strong data skills from a wide range of backgrounds. It is important that data skills are 
not just confined to scientific and technical subjects: they are increasingly central to a 
wide range of careers – and it is positive that the National Data Strategy recognises that 
this means that data science must be taught across a wider range of subjects. 
The ​Royal Statistical Society​’s event focused on identifying some of the challenges 
involved in improving data skills and discussing what could be done in order to address 
these challenges. 
Setting out the challenge 
There are challenges across the skills pipeline – beginning in school and running through 
to the workplace – where there are specific challenges facing different types of employer. 
The discussion began by considering the situation in schools and universities, before 
moving on to discuss some specific challenges that face different types of employers. 
Beginning at school level: statistics and data skills are not widely taught at this level. 
Ending AS Level maths as a stand-alone qualification reduced the number of people 
taking statistics modules and the core maths programme is only being offered by a 
minority of schools. Students who do not take mathematics at school do not get enough 
exposure to statistics and data skills. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that many 
school teachers, especially in non-scientific subjects, do not have the background to be 
able to teach the aspects of statistics that are relevant to their subject. 
A similar pattern is observed at university level: data skills are increasingly important in 
non-STEM subjects, but they are not widely taught. As with schools, this is partly 
because teaching staff are not confident in doing so. At universities, there is also a 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 16 

 
problem with retaining staff who do have data skills: they are prized by industry and it is 
hard for universities to hold on to them. 
Discussion then moved to consider a couple of examples of how data skills are used in 
the workplace: operational research in the context of the NHS and in industry. The NHS 
employs a large number of people using analytical skills for operational research – things 
like modelling waiting lists and identifying what new services might be needed where. 
This profession is not properly valued within the NHS: these roles are classified as 
admin/clerical, progression is linked to line management and there are few opportunities 
for professional development. The shortage of opportunities for professional 
development is not helped by a lack of transparency when it comes to analytical 
methods and techniques. This both means that people don’t learn from each other, but it 
also reduces organisational knowledge and efficiency. 
In industry, data science skills are scarce and there is fierce competition for them. There 
is likewise a desire from the workforce to be able to upskill, re-skill or deepen their skills: 
some way for professional development in these areas to be formally recognised would 
be beneficial. Collaborations with academia are important – part of this means ensuring 
that universities are properly aligned with industry expectations as they develop new 
courses. 
Proposals for addressing these challenges 
The discussion also covered what could be done in order to tackle some of these 
challenges. 
At school level, the reintroduction of something like AS-Level mathematics (a one-year, 
post-GCSE qualification) would be helpful as a way to introduce more students to 
statistics and data skills. In the past many students who would not wish to do a full 
A-Level in mathematics would take an AS-Level in the subject. The loss of AS-Level 
mathematics reduced the number of people who were learning statistical and data skills 
at school and there may be a case for reintroducing a shorter mathematics course after 
GCSEs. 
As is recognised in the National Data Strategy, the teaching of statistics and other data 
skills must be widened out beyond mathematics and science subjects. to ensure that as 
many students as possible have some exposure to it. This cannot be effective without 
investing in upskilling teachers of all subjects, so that they are more confident in teaching 
students about the statistical/data aspects of their own subjects. 
The situation is similar at a university level – statistics and data handling should be taught 
outside of STEM subjects. Government could incentivise universities to teach data skills 
in the widest possible array of subjects and train academic staff to properly teach 
students in their subjects. 
In order to foster understanding between industry and academia – and ensure that 
universities are producing graduates with the skills needed by industry – is to encourage 
joint appointments for people to work at the interface of industry and academia. 
Research councils should recognise diverse outputs so that this career path is properly 
valued. 
In the health service, leadership training for statisticians/data scientists should be 
provided so they can rise to senior levels in civil service. This process could be helped by 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 17 

 
introducing a government Health Analytics Service (analogous to the government 
Statistical Service or government Legal Profession), with a head of profession, training 
programmes and ways of sharing best practice. 
In government in general, where data analysts are classified in roles as admin/clerical 
they should be reclassified as scientific/technical and a national competency framework 
with pay scale and job descriptions should be introduced for this career path. And in 
operational analytics more broadly, we should aim to break open closed ways of 
working: currently results of analyses are routinely shared, but methods aren’t. Opening 
this up will drive up quality and reproducibility and, in addition, sharing methods as 
routine is a powerful way of on-boarding people. 
It is also important to develop a professional framework for data scientists with shared 
codes of practice. As noted in the National Data Strategy, the Royal Statistical Society 
has a role here to work with employers and universities to identify the skills needed for 
data scientists and accredit courses so that students and professionals can be confident 
in their quality. This work, as outlined in the meeting, is underway with the new Data 
Analyst accreditation. RSS can act as neutral broker between industry, academia and 
government to ensure that a framework here works properly from all perspectives. 
  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 18 

 
Pillar 3 (Event 3) | Availability: ensuring data is 
appropriately accessible 
 
In this event, led by the ​Open Data Institute​, we explored opportunities for developing or 
implementing some of the ideas, proposals, and actions identified in ​Pillar 3​ of the UK 
National Data Strategy in a way that is workable, sustainable, and ethical. 
Background 
Data availability covers several topics related to the collection and sharing of different 
kinds of data. Some well-known barriers to this include risk aversion, licensing, data 
hoarding, formatting, privacy and security, and equity. The aim of this roundtable was to 
discuss how to overcome these barriers, the role of government in this, and how to 
realise the full value of data in the economy. 
 
The UK National Data Strategy defines ‘data availability’ as ‘an environment which 
facilitates appropriate data access, mobility and re-use both across and between the 
private, third and public sectors in order to generate maximal economic and/or societal 
benefit for the UK.’  Data availability is the third Pillar of the National Data Strategy, which 
outlines ambitions for improving data availability for the economy and society and for 
government, and international data availability. 
 
The UK has a real opportunity with a National Data Strategy to ensure that data is made 
more open and accessible, so that value can be derived from it from every corner of 
society (public, private, the third sector or individuals and groups) while ensuring people, 
communities and our environment are protected from harms.  
 
To achieve these opportunities, the UK will need an appropriate and workable framework 
built on open standards and open data where possible, transparency, clear and honest 
communication, ethics, public engagement and understanding, and good governance. 
Furthermore by seeking adequacy with Europe on the GDPR, the UK will be in an 
enviable position of getting to build and develop stronger data protections and data 
rights on the immovable foundations of GDPR. Such an opportunity will enable UK 
citizens and businesses to think dynamically about critical and meaningful areas such as 
data portability, interoperability and what consent will look like in the world of 5G.  
 
For accessibility to function well new methods of governance may be required. An 
approach such as data institutions, which are based on independent governance and 
oversight, may prove to be necessary and welcome in order to develop trust between all 
parties: those providing data, those holding and sharing data and those using data.  
Open data 
The first session of the meeting focused on open data - the backbone of a modern, 
‘smart’ digital economy. However, it should be recognised that data covers a spectrum 
from open to shared to closed. Understanding where on this spectrum any dataset falls 
and the conditions of access is a vital part of an effective open data ecosystem.  There 
are a number of critical datasets such as those identified by the EU – geospatial, mobility, 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 19 

 
demographic and meteorological. The UK government should similarly identify and make 
available such critical datasets and encourage others to do likewise. 
 
It should be recognised that sharing data can have an impact at both the individual and 
corporate level. For example, it can exacerbate asymmetrical distributions of power or 
opportunities between companies. There’s also a risk that the benefits of sharing data 
may not be realised equitably by those allowing access to their data. In addition, 
concerns about potential privacy and security breaches can make people or 
organisations wary of sharing data. 
 
To overcome these barriers, it is essential to build trust. Building on the basic data 
foundations is also fundamental, and so standards will be important to ensure the quality 
and interoperability of the data. Audit trails and assurances will help, and trusted brokers 
or data trusts are an emerging option. Developing a well-rounded set of case studies for 
sharing data will be essential. These should articulate the added value of sharing data 
and demonstrate ways to mitigate risks, including how to build secure systems such as 
those designed by the ONS. 
 
In general, it must be recognised that the challenges and considerations relating to 
sharing data are, in many cases, human and cultural factors rather than technical. People 
must be given the necessary skills to use data with confidence. This will require sufficient 
resourcing and the recognition of data skills as an asset. An appreciation of the value of 
sharing data must be engendered at all levels of an organisation. Often data sharing is 
blocked at higher management levels or director level because of the perceived risks 
and/or insufficient awareness of the potential benefits. 
 
Cultural differences that exist between public, private or third sector organisations can be 
a source of friction in cross-sector data sharing initiatives. This can result from variations 
in technical vocabulary or common practices that differ between sectors. Even within an 
organisation, poor communication can lead to inefficient use of overlapping datasets 
while other datasets remain inaccessible and locked away. This sort of inefficiency is 
particularly an issue with cross-departmental data in government. To address it will 
require dialogues with multiple stakeholders in order to identify and categorise the data 
held and to agree on common approaches, legal frameworks and standards. 
Shared models for deriving value from data 
This session focused on potential solutions to encourage and enable the sharing of data, 
equitable returns of value, and making data discoverable and interoperable. Of particular 
interest were new models of data institutions such as data co-ops, data trusts and data 
unions. 
 
Considerations were raised around government procurement projects and research 
projects. It was seen as important that any data generated as part of a project was 
treated as an asset, rather than as underlying physical infrastructure, and that there 
would be continued funding to maintain useful datasets beyond the time frame of the 
project. In general, it is vital that data is considered as part of any procurement contract 
and that this covers how the data will be collected, stored and made appropriately 
accessible and interoperable, and that this is sufficiently funded for the long term. 
Building Information Modelling (BIM)​ in the construction sector was cited as an example 
of this being done successfully. 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 20 

 
The role of data trusts was discussed in relation to how transparency around data use 
can be improved and responsibilities for explaining to the public what their data will be 
used for, the benefits it might deliver and potential risks. The ​US Data Collaboratives 
were cited as a successful example. These are a ‘new form of collaboration, beyond the 
public-private partnership model, in which participants from different sectors — in 
particular companies - exchange their data to create public value’. 
 
The importance of developing local, bottom-up data sharing projects was emphasised. 
The local level is often where the greatest societal benefit can be realised and, perhaps 
more importantly, where the benefits can be directly felt. ​Camden’s open data platform 
and the ​London Data Commission​ were cited as examples of this. Considerations 
around digitalisation affecting power structures was reiterated. In this regard, it is critical 
that local authorities are empowered to act in the public interest and protect public 
benefits. For this to happen, it is again vital that the public sector builds up the necessary 
human capabilities.  
 
Global issues can be equally as fruitful as local ones. This is particularly the case within 
the research community and their efforts to tackle global challenges such as climate 
change. Recently, the Covid-19 crisis has shown the value of sharing data internationally. 
In particular, the ​SAIL Database​ in Wales was noted as a key national and international 
resource in fighting Covid-19. In general, it was stressed that the key to successful data 
sharing in research projects was to focus on the problem to be solved rather than the 
technology. Doing so will, in turn, drive considerations of trust and ethics and build the 
knowledge base. It will also promote a more holistic approach to data availability and 
wider stakeholder engagement. 
International data availability and collaboration  
The final session of the meeting focused on opportunities for international data sharing 
and collaboration. In particular, which international level problems could benefit from data 
sharing, what data is needed and what will be the impact of Brexit for trade and 
international relations. 
 
The ​Scientific Committee an Antarctic Research (SCAR)​ was noted as a successful and 
long running model of data collection and sharing that has promoted peace and 
collaboration. The ​Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN)​ initiative was 
also noted positively. Oceanic, meteorological, and population datasets were cited as 
examples of critical national assets. However, it was observed that commercial 
opportunities that arise from such datasets rarely goes beyond the agencies that own 
the data. In the UK, health data and the ONS were seen as particularly strong assets. In 
the commercial sector, the nuclear and aerospace sectors were identified as good 
exemplars of data sharing and collaboration. 
 
In general, it was recognised that global initiatives can be difficult. Different cultures can 
introduce barriers, and the need to equitably share value can be a challenge. It is 
therefore essential for any potential data sharing project to understand and protect 
national interests (particularly against multinational corporate interests), appreciate that 
local technical and human capacities may vary (such as the level of technical 
advancement of local health systems in relation to Covid-19), establish codes of practice, 
and develop trust. It was agreed that the UK had a leadership role to play while being 
sensitive to local interests. 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 21 

 
In relation to the National Data Strategy, it is vital that the strategy has longevity. For this 
to be the case the government must clear about its intent in relation to GDPR and data 
adequacy post-Brexit.  
Debrief by government attendees  
The roundtable concluded with a debrief session for government attendees to reflect on 
the discussions. Some of the observations that emerged from those reflections are as 
follows: 
 
The National Data Strategy must clarify what is meant by open data, the future of GDPR, 
how to improve discoverability, and how to build trust.  A possible role for the National 
Audit Office in scrutinising government’s use of data was raised. 
 
The issue of public permissions must be addressed. People often share data freely with 
companies but not with government. Government must be clear about the purpose of 
sharing data, explain the risks and then deliver on promises while demonstrating good 
practice (cf ODI report ​About Data About Us​). Public engagement and meaningful 
dialogue with stakeholders is vital. Issues relating to transparency, accountability and real 
choices for consumers are all challenging. 
 
It is important to identify pinch-points and market failures that can be addressed by 
government, and that are unlikely to be addressed by others or naturally resolved over 
time; and also to consider what kinds of interventions and policy levers are within 
government’s power - particularly given resource limits. It is vital to identify ‘quick wins’, 
while also recognising that some initiatives turn out to be more complex and challenging 
than anticipated. 
 
The importance of purpose driven issues was highlighted. These could be fundamental, 
cross-cutting issues or more specific government priorities, and they cover areas such as 
climate change, jobs, and trade. There is a desire to do more to support SMEs. 
 
Legislation is in place that is not always well understood, and some government 
departments continue to operate to older procedures. Culture change is important, but 
difficult in practice and adjusting to new processes and systems takes time. In this 
regard, Ministerial leadership is particularly important.  
  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 22 

 
Pillar 4 (Event 4) | Responsibility: driving safe and 
trusted use of data 
Background  
The Ada Lovelace Institute​ organised a policy roundtable to stimulate discussion on the 
fourth pillar of the National Data Strategy on ​Responsibility: Driving Safe and Trusted Use 
of Data​.  
 
The aim was to discuss what’s missing from the strategy and come up with practical 
recommendations for the implementation phase, to ensure that data is used responsibly 
and in the interests of people and society.  
 
The two main sections of the event were:  
1.how to develop appropriate transparency mechanisms in the public sector for 
algorithmic systems 
2.how to address actual or perceived tensions between innovation and data 
protection.  
 
We also wanted to go beyond the specifics of the National Data Strategy and:  
1.ask what the priorities should be 
2.outline what we want to see the government leading on 
3.offer challenges to the framings around ‘responsible data’ as outlined in the 
strategy.  
 
Our main takeaways from the event, which build on the key messages from the 
discussion, are summarised below. We are indebted to the contributions from speakers 
and participants.  
Realising transparency and strengthening accountability  
A step to deliver responsible data in the National Data Strategy is to ‘commit to 
addressing the need to develop appropriate mechanisms for increasing transparency 
and accountability in decisions made or supported by algorithmic systems, and for 
monitoring their impact’.  
 
The broader commitment to greater transparency was welcomed, however it was noted 
that there was less specific content on accountability. Participants argued that 
transparency mechanisms should be explicitly seen as a means of achieving 
accountability for decisions made or supported by algorithmic systems.  
 
Discussion cautioned against the idea that transparency might inherently enable 
accountability and articulated ​the need to consider the sociotechnical system​: the 
problem is often not ‘the algorithm’ but how the algorithm is being deployed, what the 
goals are and who has the power to adjust the algorithmic system.  
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 23 

 
Furthermore, some argued that true transparency and accountability require an 
articulation of the values that are deemed important, and mechanisms to hold public and 
private actors accountable should ensure the systems meet those standards.  
  
The National Data Strategy places important emphasis on the need to ensure the use of 
data is trusted. But ​to be trusted, data use must be trustworthy​. Mechanisms for 
transparent, accountable, responsible data use discussed at the workshop will be 
successful if seen as actionable approaches towards developing more trustworthy uses 
of data.  
Public sector registers  
For enabling accountability in practice, one concrete recommendation is the use of 
algorithmic registers​. Here we can learn from the cities of Amsterdam and Helsinki, 
and the work of ​Saidot​. As pioneers in this field, these cities have launched algorithmic 
registries to detail how city governments use algorithms to deliver public services, down 
to the level of the data sets used to train models and descriptions of how an algorithm is 
used.  
 
In Amsterdam the registry is indirectly linked to ​new standard clauses in procurement 
contracts that impose a duty of cooperation on the vendor​, to provide the 
municipality with all the information that may be required in order to explain how an 
algorithmic system works.  
 
One suggested way to act on the importance of responsible data in practice was to 
strengthen and require more widespread use of data protection impact 
assessments (DPIAs)​ for converting the principles of law into reality. Different from 
privacy impact assessments, DPIAs are directed to all rights and freedoms of individuals 
and should go beyond data rights to check that executives are acting within their powers 
under the law. Performing an assessment of lawfulness and considering the system as a 
whole could be steps forward for ensuring more transparency and accountability for 
algorithmic systems.  
 
Different assessment components, such as ​data protection, algorithmic equalities 
and human rights impact assessments, could be combined into one process 
under the umbrella of DPIAs, as prescribed by the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR). To make this effective further guidance and standards would be needed, 
developing from the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) existing guidance. Ireland’s 
DPIA on the contact tracing app was suggested as an example of good practice.  
 
This type of enhanced DPIA could be developed to be a requirement and be openly 
published. The process could evolve to include a public notice, a method of consultation 
and identification of certain data points to be gathered to assess efficacy and impact. 
This would enable people to understand how an algorithm was assessed and what the 
anticipated operation of it was.  
 
Currently a key block to accountability is the absence of any feedback loop in the 
automated decision-making process. Further and ongoing analysis to check whether 
implemented measures worked is not performed. Therefore, data should be published to 
allow for ongoing monitoring of a system to determine whether it is producing just and 
lawful outcomes.  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 24 

 
Additional points to note  
●Any mechanism for transparency should be designed to ensure the recipients of 
information are able to use it. The recommendation was made that the 
government undertakes deep, deliberative and participatory consultation when it 
comes to designing what transparency is for. There should be explicit 
mechanisms for putting those who may be affected or marginalised at the centre 
of the process, noting the point that minimising bias in a technical system may 
be an impossible task if the entire service or system is built on discriminatory 
practices or thinking.  
●A linked challenge was that the frame of transparency, accountability and 
fairness was currently limited to examining algorithmic systems in isolation. 
Should we expand our thinking to consider how we should deploy digital 
technologies to dismantle systemic racism for example, in other words – how do 
we establish fairness in an unjust society? Even expanding examining of 
algorithms beyond the technical to the sociotechnical doesn’t account for the 
fact that the assemblage is embedded in racialised structures that are historically 
determined. One example provocation is that the school-to-prison pipeline can’t 
be fixed by fairer or transparent algorithms. In effect the data-driven technologies 
legitimise and compound an already unjust system. Taking this frame should 
push us to ask some more challenging questions:  
○How can algorithms shift power?  
○What is the data generated for and in whose interest?  
○What values are encoded in algorithmic systems?  
○How can the pursuit of efficiency and prediction support the dismantling 
of systemic racism or other systemic inequalities?  
●Roundtable participants welcomed ‘lawful’ as part of the definition of responsible 
data, but more thinking is needed on how that is implemented in practice and 
who would need to be involved – for example the government Legal Profession?  
●Transparency mechanisms should contain information about how 
decision-makers will be trained to use systems (see Upturn report on information 
on meaningful information for scrutiny - link below).  
●There was discussion around what point transparency should kick in – ideally 
the development pipeline should be made public and feedback sought so 
development can explicitly consider risks raised by the community. This would 
require courage and capacity so needs further thought, perhaps for high-risk 
applications like social care decision-making or asylum applications.  
Data regulation and innovation  
The National Data Strategy’s underlying messages are around reaping ‘the benefits of 
greater data use’ and maintaining ‘a fit-for-purpose legal and regulatory regime’ while 
emphasising that the UK’s ‘data regime will support vibrant competition and innovation, 
building trust and maintaining high data protection standards without creating 
unnecessary barriers to data use’.  
 
Data protection legislation can be perceived to be complex and difficult to work with. 
There were questions around what burdens are linked to perception, lack of knowledge 
and understanding, versus what are actual barriers in the law. Similarly, there has been 
discussion around approaches such as checking for compliance early in the innovation 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 25 

 
process and providing more clarification, rather than a need to ‘remove barriers’ or any 
shift to a more permissive regime.  
 
One recommendation was for the National Data Strategy to proactively incentivise 
accountability and responsible behaviours by using nudge behaviour economics theory 
to drive best market behaviours. In terms of actual barriers, it was pointed out that clear 
guidance that organisations can emulate and adapt with confidence is still missing. 
Organisations need practical guidance on how to develop strategies that encourage 
innovation which aligns with good governance. That will require leadership to drive good 
practice and shared approaches to facilitate wider culture change. We will need 
standard-setters such as the ICO to help organisations translate the National Data 
Strategy into an implementable process.  
 
One message heard during the workshop is that DPIAs reverse the ‘wait and see and 
intervene if there’s harm’ approach with a more proactive, social benefit first approach. 
Instead of waiting for innovators to bring new products and services to the market, only 
to find out that they are not compliant and enforcement is needed, DPIAs offer the 
possibility to work upstream and, if done right, eliminate potential harms from the start. 
This part of the legislation implies and indicates that we should be working to secure the 
social benefits that the data protection legislation offers.  
 
A risk-based approach to innovation and leveraging data protection by design and 
default allows us to secure the social benefits of technological developments and 
upstream interventions. Weighing in risk – understood in a broad sense to include, for 
example, human rights and equalities assessments – and answering impact questions 
are facilitators in the process of innovation. In other words, this allows companies not 
only to innovate effectively and compliantly, but also to understand the legislation, which 
in turn upskills them to innovate more effectively and efficiently. The views put forward 
during the roundtable showed that compliance does not limit innovation, but instead is a 
competitive advantage as good data governance helps make better decisions and better 
products. For SMEs in particular, innovation and data protection should support and 
reinforce one another.  
 
However, there are questions around how to streamline regulatory approval for 
businesses, something that is more challenging to do in the context of the GDPR, and 
whether this is a potential gap. Collaboration among regulators across sectors could be 
further improved, as joint interventions can create greater and more widespread impact 
than working with individual businesses one at a time. Some of the participants also 
expressed support for regulatory sandboxes and involvement from multiple regulators, 
together with the ICO.  
 
There was also a clear warning voiced by some participants that the data rights that we 
currently enjoy under the rule of law cannot be sidelined in favour of codes of ethics, 
self-regulatory principles or by a ‘writing your own rules and marking your own 
homework’ approach.  
Better, not more, data  
Governments and companies are becoming more focused on data-driven 
decision-making. However, the message heard from this session is that better, not more, 
data collection leads to more innovation.  
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 26 

 
Incorrect and bad-quality data is cumbersome and costly, reducing productivity and 
blocking development. Instead, better data creates better models necessary for assisting 
in the decision-making process. It was argued that success for SMEs is supported by 
the quality of data, not the quantity. One way that companies could achieve quality of 
data is by instilling data protection and governance-first practices into their core business 
model, culture and brand.  
 
The UK government has an opportunity to change the paradigm from more data is 
better. Incentives should be centred around what data you actually need and 
front-loading innovative processes that requires less data. The government has the 
opportunity to break the implacable ‘move fast and break things’ philosophy and think of 
long-term investments.  
 
Organisations should not be encouraged to hoard data in order to innovate later. On the 
contrary, if we want better and more sustainable outcomes, the reverse approach yields 
more responsible end results. The recommendation was that the strategy should focus 
on the real research challenges around creating technologies that can do more with less 
data, getting benefit from ‘leaner’ and more focused data and not further encouraging a 
situation where people feel that they can create and store as much data as possible. The 
goal should be focused on how technology can enable us to create the balance towards 
innovating and using data responsibly.  
 
Overall, we need to think about responsible data use in the fullest sense, taking 
responsibility not only for how it is used, but also how it is maintained, kept accurate and 
representative, making sure it is used appropriately for the public benefit and ensuring 
that public benefit is robustly understood and followed while involving citizens.  
What’s missing or needs development to deliver responsible data?  
Define clearer outcomes  
The National Data Strategy would benefit from a clearer articulation of the vision and the 
strategic direction it is trying to achieve for responsible uses of data. There are questions 
about bringing more clarity around outcomes, challenges, trade-offs and potential harms. 
The strategy would benefit from acknowledging the overarching systems and cultures 
around the use of data, and shifting the focus from data itself, which narrows down the 
perspective. This would have the potential for the government not only to become a 
model data processor, but also to be a leader in developing novel data-governance 
architectures.  
Data is not responsible, people are  
The National Data Strategy talks about data for a ‘fairer’ society – a concept that does 
not have a clear definition – and leaves open questions around who has responsibility to 
ensure data is used ethically and responsibly. Potentially, a chief data officer could be 
considered for ensuring responsible uses of data, as long as the appropriate levels of 
accountability for this position are ensured. There is currently no mention of power 
dynamics between companies, users and governments, or of the ethical stance actors 
need to take themselves. For example, how do we address the power of the private 
companies that penetrate the public sector? This leaves a gap in the strategy, one that 
can potentially be addressed by robust governance, clear redress mechanisms, and firm 
and timely interventions from regulators.  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 27 

 
Public engagement  
The National Data Strategy commits to undertaking a national engagement campaign on 
the ‘societal benefits of the use of government data’ and articulates the need to ‘increase 
public engagement’. However it is not clear in the National Data Strategy how 
engagement will empower citizens to influence decision-making or strategies related to 
data.  
 
Citizens are the subjects of algorithmic decision-making, but the National Data Strategy 
does not indicate how to integrate algorithmic accountability into everyday life: how 
citizens will be part of processes for data and algorithmic scrutiny, what people’s routes 
to understanding data-driven decision-making looks like, or what recourse is available. 
Often minority communities are the target of algorithmic decisions, and there is currently 
no clarity or emphasis on how minority communities are going to be involved in decisions 
that disproportionately affect them.  
 
Value stance  
The National Data Strategy contains language around ‘value-based’ and ‘ethical’ use of 
data, but little elaboration on what that details: which values, why those values and 
inherent trade-offs between values.  
 
Explanation about how algorithmic systems work is important, and information needs to 
be tailored to the audience. However, efforts to move towards deciphering AI fail to 
address concerns around what values are being propagated through these systems. 
There is a need to articulate clearly what values society as a collective believes are 
important, and then hold companies and government accountable to building systems to 
those standards.  
 
For example, legislation could set precise public policy goals that companies need to 
meet in order to protect against discrimination, health misinformation or election 
manipulation. All necessary and proportionate measures to achieve these goals would 
need to be considered, and an independent regulator with a clear mandate to demand 
access to all relevant data and the ability to perform supervisory tests and monitor due 
diligence obligations would be needed.  
 
Addressing the question of values also means a shift in mentality from 'Can I build it?' to 
'Should I build it?', which needs to be encouraged by policy and at the same time 
economically incentivised by market practice. Another recommended change in 
perspective is represented by understanding automated decision-making processes as 
sociotechnical. Such decisions should not fall on a single technical department, but 
should be viewed more interdisciplinarily – and potentially codes of conducts could be 
developed for data scientists.  
 
The strategy emphasises the need for innovation, but safeguards and redress 
mechanisms are not mentioned. The recommendation is to include demonstrable and 
enforceable accountability programmes for organisations (public and private) to 
implement data-management policies, procedures and controls leading up to a 
safety-first implementation. For example, there could be an end-to-end view on 
algorithmic accountability, from data to logic to authorisation.  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 28 

 
Further topics discussed  
Synthetic data  
The National Data strategy says that ‘there may also be value in creating and sharing 
synthetic data to support research and innovation, as well as other privacy-enhancing 
technologies and techniques’. Concerns were expressed that this could be interpreted 
as a way for big synthetic datasets to be developed and ‘rented’ for widespread world 
use and universal research application. This type of top-down approach would not be 
the most appropriate way forward. Instead, a hypothesis approach should be 
considered, which argues for using the smallest synthetic dataset needed in order to 
achieve intended project goals and test initial assumptions.  
International data transfers  
The National Data Strategy begins its section on international data availability with the 
statement: ‘It is hard to overstate the importance of flows of data across borders to 
support economic development and global cooperation.’ However, some challenged this 
assumption, arguing that free data flows can lead to the concentration of data in the 
hands of a few dominant players, making it more cumbersome for SMEs to access 
high-quality data. Another concern was that the focus on international data flows may 
distract from the problem of setting up well-functioning data ordering regimes. New and 
innovative mechanisms would advocate for value-preserving data governance schemes, 
which translate into data being available for generating benefit for individuals and society 
at large.  
 
The National Data Strategy commits to ‘supporting international data flows while 
ensuring that transfers of personal data from the UK uphold high data-protection 
standards’. Our workshop conversations highlighted that without serious normative 
scaffolding, especially in terms of human and consumer rights, the international flow of 
data in a global data ecosystem can also cause harm. For example, the digital services 
that come from outside the UK may not conform with domestic consumer protection, 
they may use unfair business practices and undercut data privacy standards or 
safeguards against algorithmic decision-making.  
 
Furthermore, on the future of adequacy regime after Brexit, injecting free data flows in 
trade law is a questionable way forward, because this tends to crowd out other efforts 
around multi stakeholder governance that aspire towards a more rights-preserving and 
inclusive approach to safeguarding human rights. Instead, a more viable strategy would 
be, as mentioned above, to create a digital rights scaffolding, together with liberalising 
cross-border data flows while respecting data protection. Important judgements from the 
Court of Justice of the European Union (​Privacy International​, ​La Quadrature du Net​ and 
Schrems II​ rulings) are creating greater difficulties in taking on EU adequacy agreements, 
and academics and legal professionals are still in the process of assessing which 
personal data flows are directly affected by the bulk interception regime in the UK.  
 
The key message was that instead of picking the most attractive aspects of international 
data flows, there is also the need to contribute to a high level of protection of personal 
data and individual rights.  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 29 

 
Digital IDs  
Digital IDs were discussed as offering advantages for citizens, but in doing so requiring 
massive data linkage of discrete public-sector datasets, which can be used for good 
purposes such as research and statistics, but also for profiling behaviour. The result is a 
‘transparent citizen’. Linking data is increasingly used for predictions and risk indicators 
in social services, with algorithmic decision-making being put into question.  
 
It was argued that any move toward a digital ID should explore capabilities for developing 
virtual identities where citizens have different identities in different contexts, and only the 
citizens can link them. This option can be implemented on the individual’s device, 
therefore limiting privacy risks and leaving open the possibility of contributing data for 
research.  
Resources and examples mentioned during the event:  
  
●Data Protection Impact Assessments as rule of law governance mechanisms  
●ICO Innovation Hub project report  
●Guidance on the AI auditing framework  
●Project ExplAIn   
●City perspectives on digital rights  
●Proposal for an ‘all-in-one’ algorithmic impact assessment  
●Better machine learning through data minimisation  
●Data and democracy​ [event recordings]  
●When race/ethnicity data are lacking: using advanced indirect estimation 
methods to measure disparities  
●A toolkit for centering racial equity within data integration  
●The Alan Turing Institute is working with Camden City Council citizens to 
develop a Data Charter to consider how data should be used and 
implemented.  
  
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 30 

 
About us 
About the Ada Lovelace Institute 
The Ada Lovelace Institute was established by the Nuffield Foundation in early 2018, 
in collaboration with the Alan Turing Institute, the Royal Society, the British Academy, 
the Royal Statistical Society, the Wellcome Trust, Luminate, techUK and the Nuffield 
Council on Bioethics. 
The mission of the Ada Lovelace Institute is to ensure that data and AI work for 
people and society. We believe that a world where data and AI work for people and 
society is a world in which the opportunities, benefits and privileges generated by 
data and AI are justly and equitably distributed and experienced. 
We recognise the power asymmetries that exist in ethical and legal debates around 
the development of data-driven technologies, and will represent people in those 
conversations. We focus not on the types of technologies we want to build, but on 
the types of societies we want to build. 
Through research, policy and practice, we aim to ensure that the transformative 
power of data and AI is used and harnessed in ways that maximise social wellbeing 
and put technology at the service of humanity. 
We are funded by the Nuffield Foundation, an independent charitable trust with a 
mission to advance social well-being. The Foundation funds research that informs 
social policy, primarily in education, welfare and justice. It also provides opportunities 
for young people to develop skills and confidence in STEM and research. In addition 
to the Ada Lovelace Institute, the Foundation is also the founder and co-funder of the 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics and the Nuffield Family Justice Observatory. 
Find out more:  
Website: ​Adalovelaceinstitute.org 
Twitter: ​@AdaLovelaceInst  
Email: ​hello@adalovelaceinstitute.org 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 31 

 
 
 
 
 
About the Centre for Public Data 
 
The Centre for Public Data is a new, non-partisan organisation with a practical 
mission to improve the UK’s public data. We work with partners to include 
data-focussed provisions in new legislation, and campaign to fill important gaps in 
data collection. 
 
Find out more: 
Website: ​centreforpublicdata.org 
Twitter: ​@CFPData 
Email: ​contact@centreforpublicdata.org  
 
About the Institute for Government 
 
The Institute for Government is the leading think tank working to make government 
more effective. 
We provide rigorous research and analysis, topical commentary and public events to 
explore the key challenges facing government. 
We offer a space for discussion and fresh thinking, to help senior politicians and civil 
servants think differently and bring about change.  
We believe the quality of government data, and the better publication and use of 
government data, is vital for government effectiveness (government needs to 
understand how it is working and how this can be improved) and for accountability, 
allowing parliament, the press and the public to scrutinise it. 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 32 

 
 
Find out more: 
Website: ​instituteforgovernment.org.uk 
Twitter: ​@instituteforgov 
Email: ​enquiries@instituteforgovernment.org.uk  
 
 
About the Open Data Institute 
 
 
 
The Open Data Institute works with companies and governments to build an open, 
trustworthy data ecosystem, where people can make better decisions using data and 
manage any harmful impacts. ​theodi.org 
 
About the Royal Statistical Society 
 
The Royal Statistical Society (RSS), founded in 1834, is one of the world’s most 
distinguished and renowned statistical societies. It is a learned society for statistics, a 
professional body for statisticians and a charity which promotes statistics, data and 
evidence for the public good. Today the RSS has around 10,000 members around 
the world.​ ​rss.org.uk 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 is published 
by the Open Data Institute 
 
© 2020 Ada Lovelace Institute, Centre for Public Data, Institute for Government, 
Royal Statistical Society, Open Data Institute. 
 
Getting data right: perspectives on the UK National Data Strategy 2020 - November 2020 33 