

1 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
How to 
support the
capacity of
open data
initiatives with
assessment
tools
ODI-WP-2016-003 
2016-04-20
Open Data Institute

2 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Table of contents 
Executive summary  3
Introduction              5
Assessment tools: definitions and characteristics     6
The purpose of open data assessment tools  6
Open data assessment tools as a method for capacity building  7
Who carries out assessments?  8
What constitutes an assessment tool?  8
Analysis: evaluation of assessment tools for building open data capacity  11
Conclusion and recommendations for developing  
open data assessment tools in the future  15
About this report  17
Appendix              18
Bibliography              27
Authors: Satyarupa Shekhar (Citizen Consumer and Civic Action Group) and 
Vinaya Padmanabhan (Independent Consultant)

3 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
1. Executive summary
This paper reviews existing open data assessment tools, to support organisations, researchers, 
open data leaders, and global development practitioners in conducting assessments to build 
capacity of open data initiatives. 
Specifically, this paper will answer three key research questions: 
1. What is the rationale for using open data assessment tools? 
2. What are the different tools available for conducting capacity assessments, and 
what are their key features? 
3. How effective are assessment tools currently designed for building capacity of 
open data initiatives?
There are various tools for assessing different aspects of an open data initiative. Some tools 
assess the capabilities of a country or organisation to implement an open data initiative. Others 
measure the ongoing implementation of an open data initiative, or the quality of the data being 
published. Others evaluate the impact created by open data. 
For the purposes of this paper, we are particularly interested in how assessment tools can be 
used  to  provide  useful  insights  into  the  progress, opportunities, risks  and  challenges  of  
implementing an open data initiative – whether at the national, regional or city level.
Based on previous research, we have chosen to categorise open data assessment tools as 
assessing either open data capabilities, implementation or impact.
1
  While some tools fall into 
one of these categories, most overlap. Each tool has different strengths and weaknesses, 
depending on what they focus on. Yet the tools often lack coverage of in key areas: culture 
change, operational management, data management systems and estimating impact. 
Based  on  our  review  we  make  the  following  recommendations.  Assessment  tools  and  
processes aimed at supporting open data capacity building should:
1. Provide  practical  insights  for  managers  and  teams  implementing  open  data  
initiatives  on  how  they  can  improve  implementation  for  enhanced  impact.  In  
1     See Davies, T. et al (2014) Towards common methods for assessing open data: workshop report and draft framework. 
[Online] New York: The World Wide Web Foundation and the Governance Lab at NYU. Available at: http://opendataresearch.
org/sites/default/files/posts/Common%20Assessment%20Workshop%20Report.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].

4 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
particular,  include  some  interim  progress  targets  to  encourage  organisations  to  
learn from their experience and become more metric-driven in their approach.
2. Take a holistic view that covers all aspects of managing the open data initiative 
(including leadership, implementation, finances and user engagement practice). 
When  examining  implementation  aspects,  it  is  also  important  to  consider  open  
data within the context of the existing data management systems and capabilities, 
eg how data is being collected and accessed, as well as the quality of that data 
in  case  of  any  bias,  to  identify  any  possible  issues  limiting  reliability,  access  or  
reuse.
3. Incorporate inputs from multiple perspectives (internal and external) to provide 
a  ‘360’  view  of  the  health  of  the  initiative.  This  may  help  to  promote  greater  
shared ownership of results and action steps flowing out of the assessment.
4. Identify the various outcomes and impacts of open data initiatives, including 
any undesirable or unintended consequences. More effort is required to establish 
common impact measurement methodologies, for example, to estimate the value 
and financial sustainability of the open data initiative – particularly in developing 
country contexts. 
5. However, impact measurement should not be limited to only economic benefits, 
but also consider how open data connects with furthering other policy objectives 
of  the  organisation/country.  Tools  should  also recognise   the   social   and   
environmental benefits that are likely to accrue from an open data initiative 
and be able to identify suitable ways to offset the costs in order to achieve 
those benefits. 
This paper forms one of a series of ‘methods papers’ produced by the Open Data Institute 
(ODI), looking at the literature and practice around how to support the growth and sustainability 
of open data initiatives around the world. 
We begin by outlining the need for assessment tools before reviewing different open data 
assessment  tools,  their  key  features  and  methodologies,  similarities  and  differences.  We 
conclude by recommending the development of a comprehensive open data assessment tool 
that  would  be  valuable  to  organisations,  researchers,  leaders  responsible  for  implementing  
open  data  initiatives,  and  global  development  practitioners  involved  in  open  data  capacity  
building activities. 

5 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
2.    Introduction
Open  data  is  data  that  anyone  can  access,  use  and  share.  Open  data  can  help  bring   
efficiencies  to  policymaking,  boost  citizen  engagement  and  stimulate  innovation  and  
economic  growth.  Governments  and  organisations  around  the  world  are  developing  an  
increasing number of open data initiatives: building capacities to use and produce open data 
for social, environmental and economic benefits.
As  open  data  initiatives  have  expanded  around  the  world,  tools  have  been  developed  to  
evaluate capabilities to initiate open data policies, legislation, release and quality of open 
datasets, technology and technical capacity. Others have been developed to estimate open 
data’s impacts on government performance as well as its social, environmental and economic 
benefits more broadly. 
An assessment  tool  is  a  method  for  documenting,  usually  in  measurable  terms,  an   
organisation’s  level  of  knowledge,  skills,  capacity  or  performance  against  predetermined  
criteria.  The  results  can  be  analysed  to  reveal  risks  and  opportunities,  weaknesses  and  
strengths, roadblocks and progress towards achieving desired objectives.
The various reasons for conducting an assessment means that a single tool may struggle to 
capture all of the elements of an open data initiative. Multiple assessment tools may therefore 
be necessary. For the purposes of this paper, we are interested in how assessment tools can 
be used to build an organisation’s capacity to unlock a sustainable supply of open data.
Assessing open data for global development
Within  the  Open  Data  for  Development  Partnership  (OD4D),  there  is  a  focus  on  different 
methods  of  capacity  building  are  being  explored,  to  support  individuals,  organisations  and  
systems in developing countries to effectively plan, implement and manage impactful open 
data initiatives.
One of these methods is the open data assessment tool. This paper provides an overview of 
open data assessment tools, with practical recommendations for organisations, researchers, 
open  data  leaders  and  global  development  practitioners  looking  to  use  them  to  build  their  
open data capacity. 

6 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
We aim to answer three key research questions: 
1. What is the rationale for using open data assessment tools? 
2. What are the different tools available for conducting capacity assessments, and 
what are their key features? 
3. How effective are assessment tools currently designed for building capacity of 
open data initiatives?
3. Assessment tools: definitions and characteristics
The purpose of open data assessment tools
As open data initiatives have multiplied in jurisdictions around the world, so too have open data 
assessment tools. These tools assess open data quality, capacities, standards and initiatives, 
to evaluate performance and help us to understand the impacts of approaches and actions to 
inform open data strategies. 
There are several purposes for open data assessment tools, which can be grouped into five 
broad themes, depending on who is conducting the assessment and why.
1. Implementing  agencies  and  project  teams  can  use  them  to  assess  the  quality  
of  datasets,  and  monitor  organisational  progress  against  the  objectives  of  
their open data initiatives (including achievements) to prioritise opportunities for 
achieving maximum impact.
2. Governments  and  citizens  can  use  them  to  benchmark  performance  against  
other  countries,  and  identify  specific  areas  where  they  could  improve  their 
capacity to publish and reuse open data. 
3. Businesses and social entrepreneurs can use them to identify social or commercial 
opportunities for their products or services. 
4. Researchers and journalists can understand  the  degree  of  transparency  in  a  
context,  the  social  or  commercial  impacts  of  open  data,  and  identify  critical  
areas for future research to improve open data policy and practice.

7 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
5. Funding agencies and open data activists can use them to strengthen advocacy 
for investments in open data initiatives and capacity building efforts.
For the purposes of this paper, we are particularly interested in the first two themes, ie  how 
assessment tools can be used to support sustainable open data publication and use, through 
providing  insights  to  managers  and  teams  about  areas  of  progress,  opportunity,  under-
performance or risk. While we consider the other purposes to be vital in terms of growing the 
demand for open data, our focus is primarily upon the potential supply-side capacity-building 
benefits. 
Open data assessment tools as a method for capacity 
building 
Ongoing monitoring and evaluation of open data initiatives is vital as it helps governments and 
other implementing organisations to reveal problems, identify priority areas for improvement, 
and find opportunities for impact.
An assessment tool can identify how governments could engage with citizens and businesses 
better to stimulate demand for, and reuse of, open data. It can also determine what improvements 
are required to increase data quality and usability. If conducted in a participatory process 
involving external actors, including civil society, it may also help to strengthen the open data 
ecosystem to lay the foundation for social, economic and political impact.
Assessment  tools  can  make  comparisons  across  countries,  governments  or  organisations  
which allows for benchmarking against the performance of others. Assessments can determine 
common minimum features for open data initiatives to adhere to, while also promoting global 
transparency and accountability through the publication of assessment results.

8 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Who carries out assessments?
In  terms  of  process,  assessments  can  be  conducted  by  internal  or  external  evaluators.  
Internally,  it  can  be  carried  out  by  an  individual  or  group,  and  rely  on  information  shared  
through observations, staff meetings and focus group discussions with internal (employees, 
senior  management,  department  heads)  and  external  stakeholders  (users,  businesses).  
External  assessments  are  typically  carried  out  by  evaluators  from  outside  the  organisation  
being  reviewed,  and  are  based  on  publically  available  information  or  documents  that  the  
organisation shares as part of the assessment. It could also include interviews and site visits 
with internal and external stakeholders. 
To learn more about the processes followed by different assessment tools, see the Appendix.
What constitutes an assessment tool?
The  current  landscape  of  assessment  tools  includes  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
frameworks,  which  are  delivered  through  a  combination  of  external  and  self-assessment 
methods. The following table provides a summary of open data assessment tools and short 
descriptions of their methods, coverage and units of analysis. It draws on reviews presented 
in the Common Assessment Framework workshop report, the ODI’s analysis of assessment 
tools, and (unpublished) discussion notes from an International Open Data Conference 2015 
session on measurement.
[See Appendix Table 1: Landscape of assessment tools]
From this table, we can see that data assessment tools can be categorised using their unit 
of  analysis  –  datasets,  open  data  portals,  organisations  or  countries,  for  example  –  as  well  
as  purpose.  Tools  may  conduct  their  measurement  at  the  level  of  the  country,  government  
agency, or company.
The  ‘Common  Assessment  Framework’  originally  proposed  by  the  World  Wide  Web  
Foundation  and  Governance  Lab  at  New  York  University,  assesses  open  data  initiatives 
using four elements: the context where data is being released; the quality of datasets; data  
reuse; and the impact gained from published datasets.
2
 
2 See Davies, T. et al (2014) Towards common methods for assessing open data: workshop report and draft framework. 
[Online] New York: The World Wide Web Foundation and the Governance Lab at NYU. Available at: http://opendataresearch.
org/sites/default/files/posts/Common%20Assessment%20Workshop%20Report.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].

9 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
In this paper we classify assessment tools using similar, but simplified, categories according to 
whether they measure capabilities, implementation or impact. We have reframed ‘readiness’ 
as ‘capabilities’, as we are most interested in whether an initiative has the right capacity behind 
it for it to succeed, including a solid strategy and action plan. 
1. ‘Capabilities’ examines the preconditions for an open data initiative to thrive, for 
example the Open Data Readiness Assessment developed by the World Bank.  
3
Measuring capabilities can help to understand whether the conditions for an open 
data  initiative  exist,  and  could  help  implementing  agencies  to  identify  potential  
opportunities for impact, or what capacity gaps/challenges to expect. Important 
aspects  to  assess  include  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment;  organisational  
context;   political   will   and   leadership;   technical   capacity;   the   wider   social   
environment, in terms of civil society and political freedoms; and the commercial 
environment and capacity of firms to engage with open data.
2. ‘Implementation’ studies how open data policies are implemented and managed 
on a day-to-day basis. Typically these assessments examine the extent to which 
an organisation’s initiative meets the criteria for open data, ie whether open data 
is (a) available and accessible, (b) reusable and redistributable and (c) allows for 
universal participation and access. Important aspects to assess relate both to data 
and use eg issues of data relevance and quality, users accessing (or providing) 
the dataset, the purposes for which the data will be used, and the activities being 
undertaken.
3. ‘Impact’ attempts to uncover the causal relationships between open data, its use, 
and  whether  open  data  has  resulted  in  increased  transparency,  accountability,  
greater  participation,  or  other  social,  governance,  environmental  and  economic  
benefits (and any unintended or undesirable consequences).
3      See the World Bank’s Open Data Toolkit. [Online] Available at: http://opendatatoolkit.worldbank.org/en/odra.html [Accessed 
2016-04-18].

10 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
The table below summarises the categories of assessment tools, and common criteria they 
use to evaluate open data initiatives:
Category of assessmentTypical criteria being assessed
Capabilities
Legal context
Presence of organisations
Presence of leadership
Technical capacity
Social context
Economic context
Strategy and plans
Implementation  
Availability
Methodology/ quality: how complete, primary, timely, usable 
and reliable is data in general?
Accessible, reusable and redistributable
Universal participation
Classifications: what kinds of datasets are available within a 
country or sector?
Use of open data (key user-groups and datasets)
Purpose of use
Activities
Internal management (change management, capacity and 
skills, budget etc)
Impact
Social benefits
Environmental benefits
Economic/ commercial benefits
Political/ governance benefits
For more on the landscape of assessment tools and the criteria they measure, see the Appendix.
For  our  specific  research  focus,  we  have  focussed  on  the  implementation  and  impact 
categories, as these relate most closely to building ongoing capacity. 

11 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
4. Analysis: evaluation of assessment tools for  
 building open data capacity
In this section, we discuss how effective assessment tools can be designed to support the 
capacity of governments to unlock a sustainable supply of open data. 
Assessing open data capabilities
Some assessment tools focus on the capabilities of a government to design and implement 
an open data initiative. Most of these tools analyse capabilities at the national level and use a 
checklist or points-based rating system that can be administered internally or by an external 
agency. Points-based rating systems can encourage a government to build capacities in areas 
that are prerequisites for the successful implementation of an open data initiative. For instance, 
the Open Data Readiness Assessment creates a comprehensive weighted score for open data 
capability based on an assessment of the surrounding legal and economic contexts, technical 
capacity,  government  leadership  and  civil  society  participation  in  open  data  initiatives.  The  
system  allows  governments  to  prioritise  weaker  areas  for  investment  and  capacity  building  
activities. 
Current gaps and challenges
Checklists and points-based assessment systems offer a straightforward way of directing 
governments to build capacities in certain areas. However, quantitative methodologies can 
fail to capture important qualitative information. One key area is the attitude towards changing 
government culture from a closed to an ‘open by default’ position. In most organisations looking 
to  implement  open  data  initiatives,  the  biggest  obstacle  is  often  a  reluctance  to  implement  
initiatives that promote transparency and accountability. Government officials are sometimes 
concerned about opening data that could expose problems in the government, mistakes in 
the data, or that could be misused by other people. 
Tools based on surveys and checklists also tend to ignore context-specific information. For 
instance, the tools focus on the legal context of open data, and rate countries highly if they 
have  legal  provisions  for  open  data.  However,  adopting  open  data  legislation  is  a  complex  
and  time  consuming  process,  especially  in  countries  experiencing  political  instability.  Also,  
checklists can be reductive in certain contexts: several countries release data without a legal 
framework or Freedom of Information laws. 

12 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Further, the current range of assessment tools do not necessarily elicit the kind of practical 
information  that  is  useful  for  the  project  team  who  will  be  involved  in  actually  running  the  
initiative. A national-level assessment in including analysis of policy could be useful in delivering 
high-level guidance to senior leaders, but it may not equip the project team with operational-
level information to inform their action plans.
Finally, though all the tools measure different aspects of capabilities, only the ‘Open data 
in government: how to bring about change’
4
    report  recommendations  and  the  Open  Data  
Barometer attempt to link the rationale for the open data initiative to the intended outcomes. 
This linkage is important as it forms the basis for future assessments of the effectiveness and 
outcomes of open data initiatives. 
Assessing open data implementation
Most assessment tools focus on aspects of how governments and companies implement open 
data initiatives. Some tools, such as the Open Data Inventory and the Open Data Index and 
Census, use checklists and point-based rating systems to evaluate countries or companies. 
Others like the Open Data Barometer and the United Nations E-Government Survey require 
experts to survey countries/companies and assess open data implementation.
Generally, tools in this category focus on data availability, quality, and data reuse. Assessing 
data  reuse  is  important  for  several  reasons:  measuring  the  use  of  specific  data  provides 
governments with accurate information on demand, and increased levels of data reuse could 
indicate  the  success  of  a  government  initiative.  Only  the  Maturity  Model  Pathway  and  the  
European PSI Scorecard evaluate both data quality and reuse. 
Current gaps and challenges
Overall,  we  find  a  heavy  weighting  of  tools  towards  impact  research  and/or  generating 
comparative league tables, aimed at delivering content that is more suitable for an external 
audience  (purposes  3–5,  listed  above).  However,  there  appears  to  be  less  coverage  of  
implementation aspects in general to support the open data initiative itself (purpose 2).
Although existing tools in this category are relatively strong on aspects of data publication and 
use, they do not tend to provide information on how governments can improve implementation 
and  day-to-day  internal  management  of  open  data  initiatives.  In  particular,  they  do  not 
4 Broad, E. et al. (2015) Open data in government: how to bring about change. London, Open Data Institute.

13 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
consider organisational aspects such as team structure, responsibilities, strategy, budgeting 
and  leadership.  Addressing  cultural  change  issues  such  as  progress  towards  developing  
an  ‘open  mindset’,  or  improving  user  engagement  practice  are  other  content  gaps.  More  
operational-level content, and interim progress targets is required to enable teams to measure 
their progress over time and position their initiative for success.
Assessment  tools  in  this  category  typically  focus  on  certain  key  datasets  as  indicators  for  
the  state  of  open  data  implementation  including  election  results,  maps,  land  ownership,  
government budgets and legislation data. Limiting the sample number of datasets is practical, 
and many of these datasets are highly valuable. However, many tools do not explain how they 
extrapolate their findings from the sample of datasets to make judgements about the overall 
national open data ecosystem. 
We found in our review that measuring implementation poses several challenges. For instance, 
assessment tools may not capture background issues such as discrimination in data collection 
processes. These are issues that often relate to pre-existing data management systems, and 
are not specific to open data. However, tools that do not analyse how the data is collected run 
the risk of ignoring biases and irregularities. 
While many tools focus on ensuring published data adheres to the open data definition, they 
do not always evaluate the quality of that data. By failing to evaluate the quality, some of these 
assessment tools may overestimate the usability and usefulness of published datasets.
Further, automated tools that simply measure open data availability on the internet may not 
address broader issues of who is able to access and use that data – an important consideration, 
particularly in developing contexts with lower internet penetration. There may be other cases 
where  open  data  is  available,  but  is  not  used  (due  to  low  awareness,  for  example),  which  
assessment  tools  need  to  take  into  account.  As  a  result,  assessment  tools  that  focus  on  
implementation should also examine how the data is collected, and any barriers to use and 
reuse.

14 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Assessing open data impact
Measuring  impact  can  be  very  difficult,  but  several  existing  frameworks  seek  to  evaluate 
open data impacts. There are a number of studies that have developed methods to quantify 
potential  economic  impacts  of  open  data  and  have  estimated  the  economic  value  of  open  
data. For instance, a European Commission commissioned study in 2006 estimated that the 
economic value of the public sector information market was €27 billion,
5
  while a similar study 
in the UK estimated that the government’s open data portal (data.gov.uk) would increase its 
GDP by £28 million in 2016.
6
 
Eight  tools  under  review  assessed  the  impact  of  open  data,  seven  of  which  used  surveys  
and self-assessment checklists. Only the paper ‘Social impact of open data’ uses outcome 
mapping  and  case  studies  as  its  primary  methodology.
7
  While  tools  using  checklists  can  
capture information on a wide variety of impacts, the latter paper provides deeper analysis on 
interim, indirect (or ‘downstream’) outcomes, focusing on three country case studies. Outcome 
mapping, unlike one-off assessment tools, can be used as a form of ongoing monitoring and 
evaluation to measure the progress and impact of an open data initiative.
Current gaps and challenges 
As yet, there is little consensus around measuring the economic impact of open data. Work 
needs to continue in this area to advance common methods and understanding of estimating 
economic impact and value for money of open data initiatives, including in developing contexts. 
It is difficult to study the impact of something with so many potential benefits as open data. 
Self-assessing open data impact could be a promising strategy as those who have experienced 
the impact are best placed to report it and take ownership of results. There is, however, a risk 
of producing biased results. For instance the Open Data Impact Map
8
 and Open Data 500
9
  
require companies and organisations to fill in a short online survey about their use and reuse 
5      Dekkers,  M.  et  al  (2006).  Final  report  of  study  on  exploitation  of  public  sector  information:  benchmarking  of  EU  
framework conditions. Measuring European Public Sector Information Resources. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
single-market/en/news/mepsir-measuring-european-public-sector-information-resources-final-report-study-exploitation-0 
[Accessed 2016-04-18].
6     Carpenter, J. and Watts, P. (2013). Assessing the Value of OS Open Data™ to the Economy of Great Britain - Synopsis. 
[Online]  Available  at:  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/207692/bis-13-950-
assessing-value-of-opendata-to-economy-of-great-britain.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].
7      Keseru, J. and Chan, J. (2015). The social impact of open data. Sunlight Foundation. Available at: https://www.scribd.com/
doc/263776138/The-Social-Impact-of-Open-Data [Accessed 2016-04-18].
8      Open  Data  Enterprise. Open  Data  Impact  Map.  [Online]  Available  at:    http://www.opendataenterprise.org/map.html 
[Accessed 2016-04-18].
9      GovLab. The OD500 Global Network. [Online] Available at: http://www.opendata500.com. [Accessed 2016-04-18].

15 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
impact of open data. Since the survey is online, it excludes organisations that have benefitted 
from open data, but may not have access to computers and Internet connections, creating 
a biased sample. Self-reporting also relies on a common understanding of what constitutes 
‘impact’, and the distinction between open data ‘use’ and ‘impact’ is still unclear. 
Although most impact studies measure the economic and political benefits of open data – such 
as transparency and accountability – only the Open Data Barometer specifically measures 
environmental benefits. This suggests the need to look for more ways of assessing the broader 
range of open data impacts, including benefits that accrue downstream. 
5. Conclusion and recommendations for developing  
 open data assessment tools in the future
The various potential benefits of open data have now been well asserted – from increases 
in efficiency of service delivery to fostering economic innovation and entrepreneurship. The 
myriad of benefits has, in part, contributed to the difficulties around how to measure progress 
and impact. While many new tools have been developed to assess both internal and external 
aspects of open data initiatives, several elements are not adequately captured by existing 
assessment tools. 
A number of recommendations emerge from this paper, which may help researchers, open data 
leaders and global development practitioners to achieve a more holistic picture of progress, 
capacity and impact through assessment tools and processes.
1. Provide  practical  insights  for  managers  and  teams  implementing  open  data  
initiatives  on  how  they  can  improve  implementation  for  enhanced  impact.  
In  particular,  include  some  interim  progress  targets  to  encourage  organisations  
to learn from their experience and become more metric-driven in their approach.
2. Take a holistic view that covers all aspects of managing the open data initiative 
(including  leadership,  implementation,  finances,  and  user  engagement 
practice). When  examining  implementation  aspects,  it  is  important  to  consider  
open  data  within  the  context  of  the  existing  data  management  system(s)  and  
capabilities eg how data is being collected and accessed, as well as the quality 
of that data in case of any bias, to identify any possible issues limiting reliability, 
access or reuse.

16 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
3. Incorporate inputs from multiple perspectives (internal and external) to provide 
a  ‘360’  view  of  the  health  of  the  initiative.  This  may  help  to  promote  greater  
shared ownership of results and action steps flowing out of the assessment.
4. Identify the various outcomes and impacts of open data initiatives, including 
any undesirable or unintended consequences. More effort is required to establish 
common impact measurement methodologies, for example, to estimate the value 
and financial sustainability of the open data initiative, particularly in developing 
country contexts. 
5. However, impact measurement should not be limited to only economic benefits, but 
also consider how open data connects with furthering other policy objectives of the 
organisation/country. Tools should also recognise the social and environmental 
benefits that are likely to accrue from an open data initiative and be able to 
identify suitable ways to offset the costs in order to achieve those benefits.  
What do you think?
If you have insights into open data assessment tools you would like to share, we want to hear 
from you. Get in touch with fiona.smith@theodi.org or tweet us at @ODIHQ.

17 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
7. About this report 
The  Open  Data  Institute  (ODI)  connects,  equips  and  inspires  people  around  the  world  to 
innovate  with  data.  It  is  independent,  nonprofit  and  nonpartisan,  founded  in  2012  by  Sir 
Tim Berners-Lee and Sir Nigel Shadbolt. From its headquarters in London and via its global 
network of startups, members and nodes, the ODI oers training, research and strategic advice 
for organisations looking to explore the possibilities of open data.
This  report  was  supported  by  the  Open  Data  for  Development  (OD4D)  programme.  OD4D  
is  managed  by  Canada’s  International  Development  Research  Centre  (IDRC),  and  it  is  a 
donor  partnership  with  the  World  Bank,  the  United Kingdom’s Department for International 
Development  (DFID)  and  Global  Affairs  Canada  (GAC).  The  OD4D  network  of  leading  
organisations  are  creating  locally  driven  and  sustainable  open  data  ecosystems  in  Latin  
America,  the  Caribbean,  Africa,  and  Asia  and  East  Europe.  OD4D  focuses  on  building  up  
the supply of quality open data, and also on improving the use of that data by leaders in 
government,  civil  society,  the  media,  and  business  so  that  it  furthers  public  interest  and  
improves people’s lives. 
A partnership funded by

18 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
8.    Appendix
Table 1: Landscape of assessment tools
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
Common 
Assessment 
Framework
Common 
framework
CountriesAssesses open data initiatives 
using four elements: the context 
where data is being released; the 
quality of datasets; data reuse; 
and the impact gained from 
published datasets.
European PSI 
Scoreboard
Crowdsourced 
and expert 
survey of 
European 
Public Sector 
Information 
policies and 
practices
Countries 
EU countries 
(subject to the 
Public Sector 
Information 
directive)
Quantitative scores against seven 
different dimensions. Total score 
out of 700. 
Health Sector 
Indicators
Conceptual 
framework for 
measuring open 
data impact in 
specific sector
UK health sector
Applicable to 
other countries
Various quantitative and 
qualitative indicators
Maturity Model  
and Pathway
In-depth 
assessment 
and analysis 
designed to help 
organisations 
(private and 
public sector) 
to assess how 
effectively they 
publish and 
consume open 
data.
Organisations Self-assessment based on 
scoring system against five core 
categories
Analyses organisational capacity 
+ data management release 
process

19 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
OECD 
Framework
Paper suggests 
a methodology 
and framework 
to empirically 
analyse 
government 
open data 
initiatives
Framework and 
methodology 
guide proposed, 
however, no 
evidence of 
implementation 
to date
Proposed a government survey to 
be completed by officials
Open Data 500Assessment 
of the value of 
open data in the 
private sector
Companies in 
USA. Expanding 
to other 
countries.
Desk research and survey of 
companies. Linking commercial 
activity with source datasets.
Open Data 
Barometer
Annual ranking 
of countries 
according to 
government 
open data 
initiative impact
86 countries on 
2014 survey. 
Includes all G8 
countries, but 
only partial OGP, 
OECD. 
Expert survey and secondary 
data. Also gathers and reports on 
qualitative assessments.
Analyses both organisational 
capacity (ie strategic oversight) +  
data management process and 
release
Open Data 
Certificate
Platform for 
data publishers 
to assess and 
improve the 
quality of their 
own open data
Datasets
Four different 
countries so far. 
Strongest in UK
Self-assessment with guided 
questionnaire. Reports ‘level’ of 
open data quality. 
Open Data 
Compass
Focussed on 
the availability of 
open corporate, 
litigation 
and media 
information 
worldwide
Countries
Global
Quantitative score based on 
researcher assessment of data 
sources

20 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
Open Data Index 
and Census
Annual ranking 
of countries 
based upon 
whether key 
datasets from 
government 
(ie mapping, 
elections) are 
available as 
open data
Datasets
Open Data 
Index solely 
analyses 
datasets 
released, 
not taking 
into account 
organisational 
context or 
wider reuse 
community. 
94 countries in 
2014 index.
Quantitative score 
Crowd-sourced with expert review 
to create an annual index
Analyses only data type and 
category of data released by 
government
Open Data 
Inventory
A 
multidimensional 
assessment of 
data coverage 
and openness on 
NSO websites
Countries, 
focusing 
on National 
Statistical 
Offices (NSOs)
Prototype under 
development 
will be applied 
to approximately 
140 low- and 
middle- income 
countries
Quantitative score 
Information collected from 
websites of NSOs
Expert assessment based on 
defined protocol and scoring 
rubric
Open Data 
Monitor
EU project 
focused on 
automated 
assessment of 
open data
National open 
data catalogues
226 data 
catalogues, 
28 European 
countries
Automated analysis of data 
portals providing ‘real-time’ 
statistics. Methods under 
development.

21 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
Open Data 
Readiness 
Assessment 
(ODRA)
In-depth country  
assessment 
designed to 
analyse how well 
a government is 
prepared before 
its open data 
initiative launch
Countries
ODRAs have 
been used very 
widely and 
implemented in 
most developing 
countries that 
have open data 
initiatives
External assessment by 
consultant based upon qualitative 
interviews, workshops with 
key personnel. Results feed 
into a scoring system that then 
produces recommendations. 
Analyses organisational capacity 
+ data management release 
process
Open 
eGovernance 
Index
Measures ability 
of the different 
actors of the 
political system, 
including 
governments, 
business and 
civil society, 
to participate 
in decision 
making in 
society, through 
the use of 
information and 
communication 
technologies
Countries but 
currently in 
Pakistan
Measured on six dimensions: 
meshed eGovernment, 
eParticipation channels, digital 
inclusion, ICT-empowered civil 
society, open access to data, 
information and knowledge and 
communication rights
Open 
Government 
Index
Measures 
government 
openness 
based on 
general public’s 
experiences 
and perceptions 
worldwide
Global10,000 household surveys and in-
country expert questionnaires

22 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
OUR Data index 
(OECD)
Assesses 
government 
efforts to 
implement open 
data in three 
areas: openness, 
usefulness, and 
re-usability
35 countries 
(OECD + 
Colombia)
Government Survey. Assessment 
based on quantitative data 
gathered through a survey 
completed by national 
government representatives.
RTI RatingsMeasures the 
legal framework 
for the right to 
information, not 
implementation
89 countriesQuantitative score based on 
61 indicators: analyses right 
of access, scope, requesting 
procedures, exceptions and 
refusals, appeals, sanctions and 
protections, and promotional 
measures
The Social impact 
of Open Data
A comprehensive 
measurement 
of the effect of 
open data on 
society
CountriesOutcome Mapping (OM) is an 
approach to planning, monitoring 
and evaluating social change 
initiatives developed by the 
International Development 
Research Centre in Canada. It 
provides a set of participatory 
tools and guidance for teams to 
identify the desired mid- to long-
term change they are seeking to 
achieve, and how they will work 
collaboratively with internal and 
external stakeholders to bring it 
about. It also provides a way of 
measuring progress milestones of 
an initiative or programme

23 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameDescriptionScopeMethods
UN 
E-Government 
Survey
An assessment 
of how 
governments use 
Information and 
Communications 
Technology 
(ICT) to provide 
access and 
inclusion for all
The 2014 E-Gov 
Survey includes 
questions on 
open data
Countries
National web 
portals OF 193 
countries
Desk research with structured 
survey. Quantitative data.
 
Table 2: Classification of assessment tools
NameLevel of 
analysis
ClassificationJustification
Common 
Assessment 
Framework
CountriesCapabilities/ 
implementation/ 
impact
The Common Assessment 
Framework suggests that open 
data assessments take into 
account context, data, impact and 
use. The framework measures 
readiness as it takes into account 
the legal and governance context 
of an initiative and the extent 
to which it may succeed. By 
measuring data, impact and use, 
the framework also assesses 
open data implementation and 
impact.

24 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameLevel of 
analysis
ClassificationJustification
European PSI 
Scoreboard
EU countries  Implementation/ 
impact
The European PSI Scorecard 
is a crowdsourced indicator 
that measures implementation 
of government policies. It also 
captures information on the 
impact of these policies through 
indicators on the reuse of open 
data, and events and activities 
organised around on themes of 
open data. 
Maturity Model 
and Pathway
OrganisationsImplementation/ 
impact
The Open Data Maturity Model 
measures the implementation and 
impact of open data initiatives. 
It assesses how organisations 
publish and consume data 
based on five themes, data 
management, knowledge and 
skills, customer support and 
engagement, investment and 
strategic oversight. 
Open Data 500Companies 
in the United 
States
ImpactThe tool studies the use and 
impact of open data.
Open Data 
Barometer
CountriesCapabilities/ 
implementation/ 
impact
The Open Data Barometer relies 
on primary and secondary data 
to assess all three stages of the 
cycle
Open Data 
Certificate
DatasetImplementationAlthough not strictly an 
assessment tool, the Open Data 
Certificate is a portal where 
users can certify data as open. 
It assesses the quality of open 
data but does not compare open 
data across different levels of 
analysis. It is classified under 
implementation because it 
analyses whether open data has 
met a particular standard. 

25 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameLevel of 
analysis
ClassificationJustification
Open Data 
Impact Map
OrganisationsImpactThe Open Data map is set to be 
launched in 2016, but its ‘beta’ 
version provides information 
on data use across sectors in 
countries.  
Open data in 
government: how 
to bring about 
change (paper)
GovernmentsCapabilities/
impact
‘Open data in government’ 
predominantly assesses 
readiness. It contains several 
steps that governments could 
follow to plan open data 
initiatives. However, one of 
these steps involves collecting 
information on the impact of the 
initiative and, as a result, it can 
also be classified under impact.
Open Data Index 
and Census
DatasetsImplementationThe Global Open Data Index 
measures whether a country 
releases key types of open data. It 
measures the status of open data 
in a country by examining whether 
countries release ten key datasets 
and evaluating their quality. 
Open Data 
Inventory
CountriesImplementationLike the Global Open Data Index, 
the Open Data Inventory assesses 
the quantity and quality of data 
provided by National Statistical 
Offices (NSOs)
Open Data 
Readiness 
Assessment 
(ODRA)
CountriesCapabilitiesOpen Data Readiness 
Assessment (ODRA) is a 
methodological tool that 
exclusively measures the 
readiness of a government to 
plan and implement an open data 
initiative

26 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
NameLevel of 
analysis
ClassificationJustification
Open 
eGovernance 
Index
CountriesCapabilities/ 
implementation
The Open Government Index is 
similar to the Right to Information 
ratings as both assess the 
legal context, or capabilities of 
governments to implement open 
data initiatives. Unlike Right to 
Information ratings, the Open 
Government Index also measures 
aspects of implementation, like 
complaint mechanisms and civic 
participation.  
OUR Data Index 
(OECD)
CountriesImplementationThe OECD OUR Data Index 
restricts itself to measuring 
implementation on three criteria, 
openness, usefulness and the 
usability of government data
Right to 
Information 
Ratings
CountriesCapabilitiesThe Global Right to Information 
Rating restricts itself to measuring 
the legal framework for freedom of 
information in a country. It is listed 
under capabilities as it measures 
the context, and not the quality of 
implementation or impact.
The Social impact 
of Open Data
Country case 
studies
ImpactThis paper is based on qualitative 
methodology and analysis of 
secondary data. It compiles case 
studies that demonstrate the 
impact of open data use. 
UN 
E-Government 
Survey
CountriesImplementationThe UN E-Government Survey 
ranks member states on the 
status of Information and 
Communications Technology 
in their governments. Although 
not strictly an open data 
assessment, the index includes 
several indicators that measure 
transparency, openness and data 
sharing. 

27 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Bibliography
Open Knowledge Foundation, (2013). Open Definition. [Online] Available at: http://blog.okfn.
org/2013/10/03/defining-open-data [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Bates, J. (2013). Information policy in the crises of neoliberalism: the case of Open Government 
Data in the UK. In: Proceedings  of  the  IAMCR  2013  Conference,  25-29  June  2013. Dublin: 
International Association for Media and Communication Research.
Caplan, R., Davies, T., Wadud, A., Verhulst, S., Alonso, J. M. and Farhan, H. (2014) Towards 
common methods for assessing open data: workshop report and draft framework. [Online] New 
York: The World Wide Web Foundation and the Governance Lab at NYU. Available at: http://
opendataresearch.org/sites/default/files/posts/Common%20Assessment%20Workshop%20
Report.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Carpenter, J. and Watts, P. (2013). Assessing the Value of OS Open Data™ to the Economy 
of  Great  Britain  -  Synopsis. [Online] Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/207692/bis-13-950-assessing-value-of-opendata-to-
economy-of-great-britain.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Davies,  T.  (2013).  Notes  on  open  government  data  evaluation  and  assessment  frameworks. 
[Online] Available at: http://www.opendataimpacts.net/2013/02/506 [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Dekkers,  M.  et  al  (2006).  Final  report  of  study  on  exploitation  of  public  sector  information:  
benchmarking  of  EU  framework  conditions.  Measuring  European  Public  Sector  Information  
Resources.   Available   at: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/mepsir-
measuring-european-public-sector-information-resources-final-report-study-exploitation-0 
[Accessed 2016-04-18].
Gray, J. (2013). Open Government Partnership should foster accountability and social justice. 
[Blog]  Poverty  matters.  Available  at: http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/
poverty-matters/2013/nov/04/open-government-social-justice-david-cameron [Accessed 
2016-04-18].
Gray,  J.  (2015).  Five  ways  open  data  can  boost  democracy  around  the  world.  [Blog]  Global  
public  leaders.  Available  at: http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/
feb/20/open-data-day-fairer-taxes [Accessed 2016-04-18].

28 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
Gurstein, M. (2011). Open data: empowering the empowered or effective data use for everyone? 
First   monday,  Volume  6(2).  Available  at: http://firstmonday.org/article/view/3316/2764 
[Accessed 2016-04-18].
Halloran, B. and Flores, W. (2015). Mobilizing Accountability: Citizens, Movements and the State. 
Transparency  and  Accountability  Initiative.  [Online]  Available  at: http://www.transparency-
initiative.org/news/mobilizing-accountability-citizens-movements-and-the-state     [Accessed     
2016-04-18].
Hjalmarsson, A. Johansson, N. and Rudmark, D. (2015). Mind the Gap: Exploring Stakeholders’ 
Value  with  Open  Data  Assessment.  In: 48th  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  Systems  
Sciences. Kauai: IEEE.
James,  M.  et  al.  (2013).  Open  data:  unlocking  innovation  and  performance  with  liquid  
information. McKinsey  Global  Institute.  [Online]  Available  at: http://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/business-technology/our-insights/open-data-unlocking-innovation-and-
performance-with-liquid-information [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Jeztek, T., Avital, M. and Bjørn-Andersen, N. (2013). Generating value from open government 
data. In: Proceedings  of  the  34th  International  Conference  on  Information  Systems.  Atlanta,  
GA: Association for Information Systems.
Johnson,  J.  A.  (2014).  From  open  data  to  information  justice  (October  1,  2014).  Ethics 
and   Information   Technology.  [Online]  Available  at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2241092 [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Keserű, J. and Chan, J. (2015). The social impact of open data. Sunlight Foundation. Available 
at: http://www.opendataresearch.org/dl/symposium2015/odrs2015-paper20.pdf  [Accessed  
2016-04-18].
Kitchin,  R.  (2013). Four  critiques  of  open  data  initiatives.  [Blog]  The  Programmable  City.  
Available at: http://www.maynoothuniversity.ie/progcity/2013/11/four-critiques-of-open-data-
initiatives  [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Kulk, S. and Loenen, B. (2012). Brave new open data world? International Journal of Spatial 
Data  Infrastructures  Research,  [online]  Volume  7,  pp.196–206.  Available  at: http://ijsdir.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/index.php/ijsdir/article/view/285/327 [Accessed 2016-04-18].

29 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016
McClean, T. (2011). Not with a bang but a whimper: the politics of accountability and open 
data in the UK. In: APSA 2011 Annual Meeting Paper. [Online] Available at: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1899790 [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Atz, U., Heath, T. and Fawcett, J. (2015). Benchmarking  open  data  automatically. London: 
Open Data Institute.
OECD  (2012).  Supporting  partners  to  develop  their  capacity:  12  lessons  from  DAC  peer  
reviews. [Online] Available at: http://www.oecd.org/fr/cad/examens-pairs/Capacity12lessons.
pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Roberts,  A.  (2014). Beware   attack   on   openness.   [Online]  Available  at: http://www.
winnipegfreepress.com/opinion/analysis/beware-attack-on-openness-279243322.html 
[Accessed 2016-04-18].
Roberts,  A.,  (2014). Making  transparency  policies  work.  [Online]  Available  at: http://www.
freedominfo.org/2014/10/making-transparency-policies-work [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Rolberg,  R.  (2015). Measuring  ‘governance’  to  improve  lives.  [Online]  Available  at: https://
theconversation.com/measuring-governance-to-improve-lives-42100  [Accessed  2016-04-
18].
Sandoval-Almazan, R. (2011). The two door perspective: an assessment framework of open 
government. Journal  of  Democracy  (JEDEM), [online] Volume 3(2) pp.166–181. Available at: 
file:///Users/annascott/Downloads/67-412-1-PB.pdf [Accessed 2016-04-18].
Yu, H. and Robinson, D. G. (2012). The new ambiguity of ‘open government’. [Online] Available 
at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2012489 [Accessed 2016-04-18].

30 How to support the capacity of open data initiatives with assessment tools | Open Data Institute 2016