

How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders - Open Data Institute 2016
ODI-WP-2016-002 
2016-03-01
How to create
and sustain
peer networks
for open data
leaders
Open Data Institute

2 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Table of contents 
   Executive summary 3
   Introduction: networks and network thinking 5
   Peer networks as an approach to capacity building  7
      Maximising network benefits 7
    Exploring different types of peer networks 7
    Assessing peer networks and their impacts 8
   Features of effective peer networks 10
  How to create and sustain effective peer networks  10
    Managing networks: challenges  14
   Conclusion and recommendations 15
   About this report 17
   Appendix 18
 Bibliography 20
   Authors:   Fiona Smith, Brendan Harvey and William Gerry

3 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
1. Executive summary
This report reviews the theory and practice behind peer networks as a method for building 
leadership capacity. Its main purpose is to help organisations, researchers and global 
development practitioners to create successful peer networks that support leaders 
implementing open data initiatives, whether in the private or public sector. 
Peer networks have emerged as a popular means of developing leadership and sharing 
knowledge in different areas. As peer networks within the open data sector are still in their 
formative stages, there is limited literature available on their specific impacts. However, we 
can learn from the experience of more established peer networks in other fields, such as 
not-for-profit management, research for development and good governance.
This report explores peer networks, their key features and what makes them most 
effective. It also raises ongoing challenges, such as how to sustain a network beyond initial 
engagement stages. 
We find that although individuals often learn from each other within peer networks, the 
impacts may not extend to wider institutional and societal change. Further, research is 
required to monitor and evaluate outcomes at various stages of network evolution, in order 
to improve their impacts broadly.
Drawing lessons from a body of literature on network theory and peer network evaluations, 
we propose the following recommendations for organisations or practitioners interested in 
convening peer networks to support open data leadership (though they are also broadly 
applicable to other fields):
 
1. Promote ‘network thinking’ among participants. Network thinking 
describes an emerging horizontal approach to communication and decision 
making. It helps a group to form new ideas, share diverse perspectives and 
adapt, rather than be bound by rigid or pre-determined plans. This mindset 
encourages collaboration and working in more connected, open ways. 
 
2. Help to build relationships through face-to-face and virtual 
engagement. Using action-learning and appreciative inquiry methodologies 
that emphasise reflection, dialogue, feedback and joint problem solving can 
improve trust and relationships among members. 
 
3. Be flexible and adaptive to the needs of network members. The 
network must be able to adapt to meet external opportunities or demands, 
and respond to the shifting expectations and needs of its members.

4 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
4. Appoint a dedicated and highly motivated convenor. Network growth 
and sustainability often hinges on a committed coordinator or steering 
group who can help to attract resources, mobilise members and engage 
new participants.
5. Use platforms that enable members to self-organise, engage others 
and take ownership over actions. Social networking tools are increasingly 
being used to help members to collaborate on joint projects, share 
resources and communicate easily.
6. Collaborate on outputs that will build your external credibility and 
influence. The external credibility and influence of networks over time often 
depend on whether they produce high-quality research, policy papers or 
other outputs such as stories, tools, resources and guidance.
 
7. Intentionally monitor and evaluate network outputs and outcomes 
at various levels such as ‘individual’, ‘institutional’ and ‘national/policy’. 
In particular, follow up with individual members regularly to understand 
how effective the network is in supporting leadership capacity, and adapt 
approaches where necessary.
 

5 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
2. Introduction: networks and network thinking 
 
The idea of a ‘network’ can seem complex, so it is important for our purposes to 
conceptualise it as a distinct organisational form. 
To clearly define a network, it can be helpful to establish what it is not. A network is 
not simply a group of people with a shared passion for a particular topic, who seek to 
learn how to do it better through unstructured interaction.
1
 This is often referred to as a 
‘community of practice’. While communities of practice are self-selecting and informal, 
networks have more established structures. 
A network is also not a traditional hierarchical organisation. While traditional organisational 
structures have individual leaders who decide what should be done, networks use a 
distributed authority model, where network members have more autonomy to decide what 
to do, contribute and create – sometimes with the help of a coordinator.
2
A network can be defined as a social arrangement that is based on members building 
relationships, sharing tasks and working on mutual or joint activities.
3
 Networks consist of 
a set of interconnected members (‘nodes’), which are connected by social bonds (‘links’) 
formed through common activities and communication.
4
 Networks are adaptive structures 
that can be easily expanded by incorporating new members or by merging with other 
networks. The points at which networks cross over are known as ‘hubs’.
‘Peer’ networks are horizontal organisational structures, comprised of members (‘nodes’) 
who share similar identities, circumstances or contexts. Peer networks often distribute 
resources and support to members via social bonds and activities (‘links’). A member 
could be an individual person or organisation, but the key is that members enjoy equal 
participation rights. As organisational models, peer networks are flourishing with the 
combined influences of increasing economic and social interdependence, new media 
and the growth of information communication technology. Supportive technologies such 
as instant messaging, free video conferencing and online platforms now help nodes to 
communicate across transnational boundaries and global north-south divides. 
1 Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
2 Plastrik, P. and Taylor, M. (2006). Net Gains: A Handbook for Network Builders Seeking Social Change. Available at: http://
networkimpact.org/downloads/NetGainsHandbookVersion1.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].
3 Willard, T. and Creech, H. (2006). Sustainability of International Development Networks, Review of IDRC Experience (1995-
2005). Winipeg: International Institute for Sustainable Development. Available at: https://www.iisd.org/pdf/2007/networks_sus_
int_dev.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].
4 Castells, M. (2000). Toward a Sociology of the Network Society. Contemporary Sociology. 29(5), p. 695. Available at: http://
www.jstor.org/stable/2655234 [Accessed 2015-12-20].

6 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Encountering networks can encourage us to re-examine the ways we work, the ways we 
interact and even the ways we think.
5
 Network thinking has emerged to describe the 
way decisions are made and activities are organised in an increasingly interconnected 
society.
6
 It involves moving from vertical to horizontal approaches to decision-making, and 
is characterised by open systems of communication, knowledge exchange and dialogue 
facilitated by new media. It helps to form new ideas, share diverse perspectives among 
multiple contributors and adapt, rather than be bound by rigid or pre-determined plans.
7
In the last five years, networks and network thinking have emerged around open data. 
Open data is data that anyone can access, use and share. Open data can help bring 
efficiency to policy-making and service delivery, boost citizen engagement and stimulate 
innovation and economic growth.
8
 Governments of all levels (central, regional and local) are 
developing an increasing number of open data initiatives: building capacities to use and 
produce open data for social, environmental and economic benefits.
The conference report of the International Open Data Conference (2015) recommends:
“Government open data leaders need increased opportunities for networking and 
peer-learning. Models are needed to support private sector and civil society open data 
champions in working to unlock the economic and social potential of open data.”
9
Peer networks can be important in supporting the capacities of open data leaders within 
sectors, cities and countries, and across regions. 
The remainder of this report is structured in three parts. The first section outlines the 
different types of peer networks and their impacts. The second section analyses the 
characteristics of effective peer networks, and the challenges of creating and sustaining 
a network. The final section provides our conclusions and recommendations for 
convening peer networks effectively.
5 Mitchell, M. (2006). Complex Systems: Network Thinking. Santa Fe Institute Working Paper 2006-10-036. Available at: http://
www.santafe.edu/media/workingpapers/06-10-036.pdf. See also: Watts, D. (2003) Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected 
Age. New York: Gardner’s Books; and Barabrasi, A. L (2002). Linked: The New Science of Networks, New York: Perseus.
6 See Castells, M. (2000). As above; and Van Djik, J. (1991). The Network Society: Social Aspects of New Media. Houten: De 
netwerkmaastchappij Bohn Staflen Van Loghum.
7 See Ogden, C. (2011). Network Thinking. [Blog] Interaction Institute for Social Change. Available at: http://interactioninstitute.
org/network-thinking [Accessed 2015-12-20].
8 See for example: Tennison, J. (2015) The Economic Impact of Open Data: What Do We Already Know? [Blog] Huffington Post 
Blog. Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/jeni-tennison/economic-impact-of-open-data_b_8434234.html [Accessed 
2015-12-20].
9 Enabling the Data Revolution: An International Open Data Roadmap (2015). Conference Report, 3rd International Open Data 
Conference, Ottawa, Canada May 28-29, 2015. Available at: http://1a9vrva76sx19qtvg1ddvt6f.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/
wp-content/uploads/2015/09/IODC2015-Final-Report-web.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].

7 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
3. Peer networks as an approach to capacity building
Maximising network benefits
With their horizontal organisational structure, peer networks can easily distribute resources 
and support among their members. Knowledge and insights can be developed by sharing, 
distributing and building upon information held by individual members, thereby increasing 
the potential for collective impact.
Leadership development programmes often employ peer networks to expand ties between 
leaders who have shared interests, work objectives or experience.
10
 In a peer-leadership 
network, members are encouraged to share information, offer advice and support, and 
learn management techniques from each other. 
The rationale for connecting peers within networks is that often the most practical or 
relevant information for people can be obtained from reliable contacts at the same level, 
rather than from further up the organisational hierarchy or back in institutional archives. In a 
new and fast-moving field like open data, ties between practitioners at the forefront of the 
movement are particularly important. There is not yet a well-established bank of wisdom to 
draw upon, so networks may help to spread and solidify emerging knowledge much faster.
Exploring different types of peer networks
The purposes, scope, size, membership and governance of peer networks we surveyed for 
this review varied greatly. Some networks aimed to link sector leaders within community 
groups, donors and non-governmental organisations (NGOs). Other networks aimed to 
influence policy through voluntary association and mobilising members. Others provided 
social connections and developed ‘soft skills’ among their members.
11
 
Open data networks exist at different levels: regional, national or international. Some open 
examples of data networks are listed below.
•	The Open Data for Development Network is a global initiative of 
NGOs, donors and research organisations seeking to understand and 
then scale open data solutions for economic and social development. 
10 Hoppe, B. and Reinelt,C. (2010). Social Network Analysis and the Evaluation of Leadership Networks. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 21, p. 600.
11 Bernard, A. (1996). IDRC Networks: An Ethnographic Perspective, IDRC Evaluation Unit.

8 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
•	The Latin America Open Data Initiative is a regional initiative that 
seeks to promote research, use and re-use of open data across Latin 
America. 
•	The UK Government Linked Data Group is a UK-based initiative 
which brought together civil servants working across departments to 
optimise technology for government. 
• GODAN (Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition) is a 
sector-based network of NGOs, researchers, universities, private sector 
actors, global institutions and governments to support global efforts 
making agricultural and nutritionally relevant data more available, 
accessible and usable.
•	The Open Data Leaders Network is a global network of public sector 
open data leaders at different levels (city, regional and national) to 
promote peer-learning and knowledge exchange.
See the appendices for a fuller list of existing open data networks. 
Assessing peer networks and their impacts
Defining and measuring the results of peer networks is challenging, particularly when 
desired impacts depend on other actors or take a long time to achieve, such as policy 
change. 
Frequently reported positive impacts of peer networks include:
12
•	personal and professional relationships being formed
•	members gaining social capital
•	members promoting new thinking and solutions 
•	improved professional approaches within a sector, through the 
development of shared standards and best practice
Other reported impacts of peer networks are:
•	enhanced institutional, sectoral or organisational capacity within 
members’ respective organisations
•	increased public awareness of the network’s cause, credibility, quality 
of training or activities, and increased membership levels 
12 See for example Brown, L .and Gaventa, J. (2008). Constructing transnational action research networks: Observations and 
reflections from the case of the Citizenship DRC. IDS Working Paper, 302. Available at: http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/
CentreOnCitizenship/gaventabrownwp302.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-19]; and Taschereau, S. and Bolger, B. (2007). Networks 
and Capacity: A theme paper prepared for the study ‘Capacity, Change, and Performance.’ European Centre for Development 
Policy Management. Available at http://ecdpm.org/publications/networks-capacity [Accessed 2015-12-20].

9 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
•	improved government policies or laws as a result of joint network 
activity or influence
•	broader social outcomes through leveraging resources, improving 
decision-making, influencing policy affecting social change and 
catalysing civic engagement
As this list shows, network impacts can occur at different levels: individual, network, policy 
or institutional and broader community or societal. 
The levels of impact can be interpreted by applying Donald Kirkpatrick’s ‘four levels of 
evaluation’. Kirkpatrick created this model for evaluating training programmes, which is 
considered a standard in the fields of education, training and capacity building. The four 
levels consist of reaction (customer satisfaction), learning (knowledge and skills gained), 
behaviour (change in behaviour, attitudes or performance), and results (impacts on 
individual productivity, business, or society).
13
 
While there is substantial evidence of impact of peer networks at the ‘reaction’ and 
‘learning’ levels, the evidence of impact is weaker further up the chain. One of the most 
commonly reported impacts is increased social capital, through the formation of new 
connections and professional relationships outside the individual’s original sphere (known 
as ‘bridging’ bonds). However, there are fewer examples of peer networks leading to 
demonstrated behaviour and institutional change. This could be due to a lack of end-to-
end studies unpacking the entire process from initial peer-engagement through to broader 
societal impact. 
Ongoing research and monitoring of networks is required to understand various large-scale 
impacts over time, and value for money of investments into network-building, especially as 
the range of open data networks mature. There is a growing body of research about how to 
evaluate networks, the details of which are outside the scope of this paper.
14
 Researchers 
are trying to define what to measure (indicators) and methods to measure networks (such 
as social network analysis). 
13 Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1998). Evaluating training programmes: The four levels. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler 
Publishers.
14 See for example Durland, M. M. and Fredericks, K. A. (2005). An introduction to social network analysis. New Directions for 
Evaluation, 2005 (107), p. 5–13. 

10 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
4. Features of effective peer networks
This section explores the features that contribute to creating and sustaining effective 
peer networks. Due to a lack of literature available on open data networks, these features 
have been drawn from reports that evaluate peer networks from other sectors, which may 
nonetheless have broader applicability.
15
 
We have structured network features into three phases: preparing, convening, and 
sustaining. 
The preparing phase establishes the foundations of a network structure, while the 
convening phase is oriented towards building the social (bonding) capital of members. 
The final sustaining phase is focused on moving from peer engagement to driving broader 
social and institutional impact. 
Constructing an effective network is an iterative task, which involves developing 
formal structures and informal norms, and defining tasks to guide collective action and 
accomplish shared goals. Nascent networks often have informal systems based on general 
consensus around activities, but develop more formal systems later on.
16
 Over time, 
formal systems may be become embedded, but the focus on continual improvement and 
adaptation should remain. Network coordinators or facilitators should continue to take 
advice on structure, processes and direction from members of the network.
How to create and sustain effective peer networks
Below is a summary of actions within each phase of creating and sustaining peer networks, 
drawn from reports assessing and evaluating peer networks in different sectors.
1. Preparing the network
• Identifying participants. Network conveners should be explicit about 
the network’s initial objectives and the desired qualities of prospective 
members.
17
 Network members need not be homogeneous – a well-
15 See bibliography for list of the ‘evaluations of peer networks’ referenced.
16 Fox, J. and Brown, D. B. (1998) Assessing the Impact of NGO Advocacy Campaigns on World Bank Projects and Policies. 
In Fox, J. and Brown, D. B (eds.) The Struggle for Accountability: The World Bank, NGOs and Grassroots Movements. 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
17 Sabet, Z. (2014). Becoming Better Capacity Builders: What GDNet has learned about developing researchers’ confidence 
and ability to communicate their research. [Blog] Department for International Development R4D. Available at: http://r4d.dfid.
gov.uk/pdf/outputs/GDNET/Becoming-Better-Capacity-Builders_GDNet_30_06_14.pdf. [Accessed 2015-12-20].

11 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
managed, diverse group of members can work successfully where 
dynamics are managed sensitively.
18
 Participants should be treated as 
individuals (rather than representatives of their agencies), and members 
matched according to similar function.
19
 
• Developing a flexible inception workshop design. The initial network 
meeting (or ‘inception workshop’) should be tailored to participants: 
their backgrounds, familiarity with the subject, previous work and 
affiliated organisations. Conducting a survey prior to the workshop is 
an effective way to help curate content. The content itself should strike 
a balance between theory and practice, and include hands-on sessions 
for members to apply what they have learned to their own contexts.
20
 
2. Convening the network 
• Articulating shared values and purpose. The network should be 
organised around shared values and objectives that make sense 
in light of the strategies of individual members.
21
 A shared vision is 
constructed through reflection and debate, and may evolve over time. 
• Building connections across boundaries. Members must be 
introduced to establish bonds among groups or individuals who are 
not already connected. Helpful techniques to facilitate this include 
‘study circles’ and ‘world cafés’ to promote dialogue among people 
with different perspectives or experience.
22
 These connections can later 
help members to self-organise and innovate around common interests 
or challenges.
• Developing trusting and respectful relationships. Networks depend 
on relationship building, particularly when other tools – such as 
binding contracts or enforceable rules – are not available.
23
 Forms of 
engagement include workshops, field visits and meetings that enable 
intensive interaction.
24
 Well organised face-to-face meetings are 
important in building trust, mutual understanding and motivation to 
18 Powell, W. W. (1990). As above.
19 Andrews, M. and Manning, N. (2015). Mapping Peer-Learning Initiatives in Public Sector Reforms in Development. CID 
Working Paper (298), p. 49. Available at: http://bsc.cid.harvard.edu/files/bsc/files/andrews_peer_learning_298_0.pdf. [Accessed 
2015-12-22].
20 Sabet, Z. (2014). As above.
21 Castells, M. (2000). As above (p. 694); and Powell, W. W. (1990). As above.
22 Meehan, D. and Reinelt, C. (2012). Leadership and Networks: New ways of developing leadership in a highly connected 
world, Leadership Learning Community, 9, Available at http://leadershiplearning.org/system/files/LLCNetworkNLfinal4.pdf. 
[Accessed 2015-12-20].
23 Church, M. et al. (2002). Participation, Relationships and Dynamic Change: New Thinking on Evaluating the Work of 
International Networks, UCL Development Planning Unit Working Paper,121, pp. 1–43.
24 Brown, D. L. and Gaventa, J. (2008). As above.

12 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
continue (often virtual) engagement between meetings. 
• Promoting network thinking from the outset. This involves working 
in more connected ways, being willing to share ideas, information and 
contacts.
25
 Cultivating the network-thinking mindset can happen during 
the course of working together on joint projects, or through soft-skills 
training within networking strategies. 
• Leveraging collective expertise and resources. Access to the 
technical knowledge and expertise of other members is an important 
attraction for prospective members, and a condition for network 
legitimacy. Successful networks offer possibilities for members to 
use their experience and skills to create new projects and leverage 
resources. 
3. Sustaining the network
• Encouraging informal leadership. It is important to develop a 
leadership style that is informal, fluid and open. Coordinators must be 
able to facilitate participation from people with diverse perspectives, 
articulate a vision, persuade individuals to work together, and tap into 
members’ knowledge, skills and experience.
26
• Building platforms for self-organisation and ownership. Creating 
platforms (virtual or face-to-face) that enable individuals to self-
organise is essential for sustaining strong networks. Strong networks 
create many avenues for engagement and for members to take 
ownership over actions. 
• Cultivating communities of learning. Increasingly, action learning 
sets are being used to create opportunities for joint problem solving 
by drawing on the knowledge of participants. Effective networks 
also invest in knowledge management systems, document collective 
knowledge, and create story banks of network activity.
• Using existing tools for ongoing communication and collaboration. 
Effective networks often harness communications technology to enable 
interaction between members across boundaries. In some cases, 
social media can facilitate more efficient collaboration, especially for 
regional and international networks. 
• Formalising a governance structure. A wide variety of network 
governance structures exist – from loose and voluntary to formal 
fee-based models of membership with a secretariat or steering group. 
Smaller, informal networks can be quite effective with the support of a 
25 Hoppe, B. and Reinelt, C. (2010). As above.
26 Taschereau, S. and Bolger, B. (2007). As above.

13 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
relatively small number of members who donate time on a continuous 
or rotational basis. However, as networks grow they often require a 
dedicated coordinator or secretariat with an operating budget.
27
 No one 
structure is reported to be more effective than another, but generally 
those networks with a relatively simple programme design, strong core 
focus and small number of activities seem to be easier to develop and 
maintain.
• Connecting with other professional networks. By engaging with 
other groups with similar goals, networks can expand their reach. 
This can be interpreted as ‘bridging capital’. However, some authors 
warn against expanding too quickly and recommend ideally first 
consolidating a small core membership base.
28
• Ensuring adaptive capacity. Effective networks are capable of 
managing change in response to shifting contexts. This means 
identifying external opportunities and threats, and continuously 
gathering intelligence from a range of sources to develop appropriate 
strategies.
29
27 Ibid.
28 Browne, E. (2013). Effectiveness of African Regional Professional Associations. GSDR, 5. Available at http://www.gsdrc.org/
docs/open/HDQ983.pdf. [Accessed 2015-12-18].
29 Sorgenfrei, M. and Wrigley, R. (2015) Building Analytical and Adaptive Capacities for Organisational Effectiveness. INTRAC 
Praxis Paper, 4. Available at http://www.hiproweb.org/fileadmin/cdroms/Biblio_Renforcement/documents/Chapter-2/
Chapter2_1/Chap2_1Doc8_1.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].

14 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Managing networks: challenges
Networks can be complicated to manage. Creating and sustaining them can take 
substantial effort from their coordinators, as well as resolving conflict within them. 
Challenges include:
Communication and building relationships
Some networks report challenges around communications when using online tools, 
including technical language and access problems. A related challenge is that replicating 
opportunities for networking – which is essential to building relationships – is difficult 
when confined to online tools. Online courses can be effective for training, but cannot 
replace face-to-face interactions when building trust.
30
 To move beyond simple information 
exchange to joint action requires some in-person meetings.
Member diversity and enabling cohesion 
Diverse membership can help bolster successful networks, but it can also lead to a lack 
of cohesion between members.
31
 Building a network culture through defining goals, 
establishing a shared purpose, and confirming common values may help prevent conflict. 
Being voluntary in nature, another factor that can affect network growth is high member 
turnover, either through members leaving or changing jobs. By injecting new skills and 
energy, a shifting membership base can have positive effects, but it can also compromise 
efforts to strengthen capacity.
Member capacity 
Balancing different levels of capacity among individuals and institutions can be difficult. 
Research networks, for example, might assume a similar level of capacity among individual 
researchers and organisations, but this might not be the case. It is therefore important to 
understand capabilities through a realistic assessment, to maximise the participation of 
members. A basic assessment exercise could be built into planning stages of the network 
to help strike the right balance.  
Funding, resources and demonstrating results
Managing networks can be costly in terms of time and resources, especially in the early 
stages. Due to pressure from donors or the constraints of project funding, networks may 
be pushed to demonstrate results (concrete products and outcomes) quickly. However, 
networks can take between five and seven years to establish legitimacy in their sector and 
develop strong links with policymakers.
32
30 Sabet, Z. (2014). As above.
31 Bernard, A. (1996). As above.
32 Ibid..

15 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
5. Conclusions and recommendations
This report has summarised existing research and practice related to peer networks, to 
inform the efforts of peer networks seeking to build open data capacity. 
In doing so, we have drawn on a broad range of literature on network thinking, and network 
evaluations from different sectors. There are a number of lessons about effective network-
building that the open data community can learn from.
Building open data networks to improve open data’s use and 
impacts in different sectors
Peer networks have great potential to support open data practice and facilitate high-
level reform. Our research finds much of the visible impact of peer networks within other 
sectors occurs at the individual level. Network participants frequently report a sense of 
empowerment, learning new skills and increased social capital. 
We also found several features of effective networks, including articulating a shared vision 
and formalising governance structures over time.  However, the literature on peer networks 
often focuses on the formative and peer engagement stages, rather than assessing the 
impacts of networks at scale (at the institutional or national level). This suggests the need 
for continued research, monitoring and evaluation of networks as a methodology — 
especially as open data peer networks grow and mature.
Based on our review, we have developed a set of practical recommendations for 
organisations or individuals who are interested in network-building to support leadership 
and open data practice globally. This kind of peer-to-peer exchange will be key to 
overcoming implementation challenges and extending impact as initiatives mature.
Summary recommendations
1. Promote network thinking among participants. Network thinking 
describes an emerging horizontal approach to communication and 
decision-making. It helps a group to form new ideas, share diverse 
perspectives and adapt, rather than be bound by rigid or pre-
determined plans. This mindset encourages collaboration and working 
in more connected, ‘open’ ways.
2. Help to build relationships through face-to-face and virtual 

16 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
engagement. Using action learning and appreciative inquiry 
methodologies that emphasise reflection, dialogue, feedback and 
joint problem-solving can improve trust and relationships amongst 
members.
33
3. Be flexible and adaptive to the needs of network members. The 
network must be able to adapt to meet external opportunities or 
demands and respond to the shifting expectations and needs of its 
members.
4. Appoint a dedicated and highly motivated convenor. Network 
growth and sustainability often hinges on a committed coordinator or 
steering group who can help to attract resources, mobilise members 
and engage new participants.
5. Use platforms that enable members to self-organise, engage and 
take ownership over actions. Social networking tools are increasingly 
being used to help members to collaborate on joint projects, share 
resources and communicate easily.
6. Collaborate on outputs that will build your external credibility and 
influence. The external credibility and influence of networks over time 
often depends on whether they produce high-quality research, policy 
papers or other outputs such as stories, tools, resources and guidance. 
7. Intentionally monitor and evaluate network outputs and outcomes 
at various levels such as ‘individual’, ‘institutional’ and ‘national/
policy’. In particular, follow up with individual members regularly to 
understand how effective the network is in supporting leadership 
capacity, and adapt approaches where necessary.
What do you think?
If you have insights into open data or network building that you would like to share, we 
want to hear from you. Get in touch with fiona.smith@theodi.org or tweet us at @ODIHQ.
33 See for example Taschereau, S. and Bolger, B. (2007).

17 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
About this report 
The Open Data Institute (ODI) connects, equips and inspires people around the world 
to	innovate	with	data.	It	is	independent,	nonprofit	and	nonpartisan,	founded	in	2012	by	
Sir Tim Berners-Lee and Sir Nigel Shadbolt. From its headquarters in London and via 
its global network of startups, members and nodes, the ODI oers training, research and 
strategic advice for organisations looking to explore the possibilities of open data.
This report was supported by the Open Data for Development (OD4D) programme. 
OD4D is managed by Canada’s International Development Research Centre (IDRC), 
and it is a donor partnership with the World Bank, the United Kingdom’s Department for 
International Development (DFID) and Global Affairs Canada (GAC). The OD4D network of 
leading organisations are creating locally driven and sustainable open data ecosystems  
in Latin America, the Caribbean, Africa, and Asia and East Europe. OD4D focuses on 
building up the supply of quality open data, and also on improving the use of that data 
by leaders in government, civil society, the media, and business so that it furthers public 
interest and improves people’s lives.
A partnership funded by

18 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Appendix
Glossary of related terms 
Action learning
A technique which harnesses the existing knowledge, skills and capacity of a small group 
of people, applied to real-world challenges. It uses a process of structured questioning 
and reflection to unlock understanding of familiar concepts, while producing new ideas or 
approaches to solving problems. It is a form of peer-learning.
Appreciative inquiry
A theory and practice for approaching change in an organisation or team through a process 
of asking questions in a systematic way, focusing on identifying what is already working 
well (strengths), analysing why, and visioning what could be possible in the future. It can be 
used as a method for problem-solving or action-planning.
Community of practice
While a network is created in the context of a specific network architecture, membership in 
a community of practice is self-selected. Communities of practice are often found in either 
large organisations, or across organisations where individuals are informally connected 
by shared expertise and passion for a common enterprise eg engineers working in a large 
organisation or consultants in a specialist area.
1
 
Peer-learning 
Peer-learning activities can range from informal communities of practice, through to 
lesson-sharing platforms for donors, online classrooms, to highly structured benchmarking 
exercises between organisations. New knowledge and patterns of behaviour are acquired 
by direct experience, by observing the behaviour, and the consequences of others’ 
behaviour.
2
 Peer-learning may take place at the group level (where the primary unit of 
analysis is the agency or the country) or individual level (where individuals gain practical 
insights from engagement).
36 Wenger, E., McDermott, R., and Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice: A Guide to Managing Knowledge. 
Boston, Cambridge University Press.
37 Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of Practice and Social Learning Systems. Organisation, 7 (2), pp. 225–246. Accessed on 18 
December 2015 at http://homepages.abdn.ac.uk/n.coutts/pages/Radio4/Articles/wenger2000.pdf. [Accessed 2015-12-20].

19 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Social capital
The OECD defines social capital as networks of shared norms, values and understandings 
that facilitate co-operation within or among groups. These networks are comprised of 
bonds (links based on common identity eg family), bridges (links that stretch beyond a 
common identity eg work acquaintances) and links (links to groups further up or lower 
down the social ladder).
Examples of open data networks
UK Government Linked Data Group (http://data.gov.uk/linked-data/UKGovLD)
Open Data For Development (OD4D) (http://od4d.net)
Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) (http://www.godan.info)
RedGealc (http://www.redgealc.net/home/en)
Inter-American Network on Government Procurement (http://www.ricg.org/home/en)
Latin America Open Data Initiative (ILDA) (http://idatosabiertos.org)
Network of Innovators (GovLab) (http://noi.thegovlab.org)
Open Data Leaders Network (http://theodi.org/open-data-leaders-network)
Open Data Institute Nodes (https://theodi.org/nodes)
Open Data Institute Startups (http://theodi.org/start-ups) 
Open Data Incubator Europe (ODINE) (https://opendataincubator.eu)
Open Data for Development Network (http://www.od4d.net)
Open Data Leaders Meetup (https://www.datainnovation.org/2015/09/open-data-leaders-
meetup)
Open Data in Central Europe and Asia (ODEC) (http://www.odecanet.org)

20 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Bibliography
Evaluations of peer networks
Andrews, M. & Manning, N. (2015). Mapping Peer-Learning Initiatives in Public Sector 
Reforms in Development. CID Working Paper, 298. Available at http://bsc.cid.harvard.edu/
files/bsc/files/andrews_peer_learning_298_0.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-22].
Brennan, P. (2013). What Do Voluntary Leaders Do? A Report on a Joint Project of the 
Coalition of National Voluntary Organisation and the Association of Canadian Community 
Colleges. Available at http://www.vsi-isbc.org/eng/hr/pdf/nli_report.pdf [Accessed 2015-
12-22].
Brown L.D., and Gaventa, J. (2008). Constructing Transnational Action Research 
Networks: Observations and Reflections from the Case of the Citizenship DRC. Institute of 
Development Studies, 302, pp. 1–30. 
Browne, E. (2013). Effectiveness of African Regional Professional Associations. GSDR, 
1-11. Available at http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/HDQ983.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-22].
Meehan, D. and Reinelt, C. (2012). Leadership and Networks: New ways of developing 
leadership in a highly connected world. [Blog] Leadership Learning Community. Available at 
http://leadershiplearning.org/system/files/LLCNetworkNLfinal4.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].
Sabet, Z. (2014). Becoming Better Capacity Builders: What GDNet has learned about 
developing researchers’ confidence and ability to communicate their research. [Blog] 
Department for International Development R4D. Available at http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/
outputs/GDNET/Becoming-Better-Capacity-Builders_GDNet_30_06_14.pdf [Accessed 
2015-12-20].
Sorgenfrei, M. and Wrigley, R. (2005). Building Analytical and Adaptive Capacities for 
Organisational Effectiveness. INTRAC Praxis Paper, 4. Available at http://www.hiproweb.
org/fileadmin/cdroms/Biblio_Renforcement/documents/Chapter-2/Chapter2_1/
Chap2_1Doc8_1.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].
Taschereau, S. and Bolger, B. (2007). Networks and Capacity: A theme paper prepared for 
the study ‘Capacity, Change, and Performance. European Centre for Development Policy 
Management. Available at http://ecdpm.org/publications/networks-capacity [Accessed 
2015-12-20]. 

21 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Willard, T., and Creech, H. (2006). Sustainability of International Development Networks 
Review of IDRC Experience (1995-2005). Winipeg: International Institute for Sustainable 
Development. Available at: https://www.iisd.org/pdf/2007/networks_sus_int_dev.pdf 
[Accessed on 2015-12-21].
Other references
Barabrasi, A. L. (2002). Linked: The New Science of Networks, New York: Perseus.
Bernard, A. (1996). IDRC Networks: An Ethnographic Perspective. IDRC Evaluation Unit.
Castells, C. (2000). Toward Sociology of the Network Society. Contemporary Sociology, 29 
(5). Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2655234 [Accessed on 2015-12-21].
Church, M., Bitel, M., Armstrong, K., Fernando, P., Gould, H., Joss, S., Marhawa-Diedrich, 
M., Torre, L., and Vouhe, C. (2002). Participation, Relationships, and Dynamic Change: New 
Thinking on Evaluating the Work of International Networks. UCL Development Planning Unit 
Working Paper, 121, pp. 1–43.
Durland, M. M. and Fredericks, K. A. (2005). An introduction to social network analysis. 
New Directions for Evaluation, 2005 (107), pp. 5–13. 
Hoppe, B. Reinelt, C. (2010). Social Network Analysis and the Evaluation of 
Leadership Networks. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, pp. 600–620. Available at: http://
leadershiplearning.org/system/files/SNA%20and%20Leadership%20Networks%20-%20
LQ.pdf [Accessed on 2015-12-21].
Keely, B. (2007). Human Capital: How what you know shapes your life. OECD Insights, 
Paris, OECD Publishing.
Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1998). Evaluating training programs: The four levels. 2nd ed. San 
Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Mitchell, M. (2006). Complex Systems: Network Thinking, Santa Fe Institute Working Paper 
2006-10-036. Available at: http://www.santafe.edu/media/workingpapers/06-10-036.pdf 
[Accessed on 2015-12-21].
Ogden, C. (2011). Network Thinking. Interaction Institute for Social Change. Available at: 
http://interactioninstitute.org/network-thinking [Accessed on 2015-12-21].
Plastrik, P. and Taylor, M. (2006). Net Gains: A Handbook for Network Builders 

22 How to create and sustain peer networks for open data leaders | Open Data Institute 2016
Seeking Social Change. Available at: http://networkimpact.org/downloads/
NetGainsHandbookVersion1.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-20].
Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organisation. 
Organisational Behaviour,12, pp. 295–336. Available at http://www.uvm.edu/~pdodds/files/
papers/others/1990/powell1990a.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-19].
Van Djik, J. (1991). The Network Society: Social Aspects of New Media. Houten: De 
netwerkmaastchappij Bohn Staflen Van Loghum.
Watts, D. (2003). Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York: Gardner’s 
Books.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of Practice and Social Learning Systems. Organisation, 
7(2), pp. 225–246.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., and Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice: A 
Guide to Managing Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Enabling the Data Revolution: An International Open Data Roadmap (2015). Conference 
Report, 3rd International Open Data Conference, Ottawa, Canada May 28-29, 2015. 
Available online at: http://1a9vrva76sx19qtvg1ddvt6f.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/IODC2015-Final-Report-web.pdf [Accessed 2015-12-22].

