

The Legal  
Data Vision

2

3
fair and sustainable legal sector that upholds public trust, and works in 
the best interests of the people and organisations it serves.
“Embracing and responsibly using data is critical to the future success 
of the legal sector and the people it serves. Without data we cannot 
innovate, hold ourselves to account or provide the clear counsel and 
service people need. All within the sector need to work to improve 
how data is collected and made accessible, including realising the 
shared opportunities of open data in law.”
Jenifer Swallow, 
LawtechUK Director, Tech Nation 
The Legal Data Vision is the result of a project led by LawtechUK, 
working with the Open Data Institute (ODI) and a range of cross-sector 
experts and others who share a common purpose, of responsibly 
accessing and using legal data to drive innovation and serve business 
and society.  
“Improving access to data has the potential to transform the legal 
sector, from supporting the development of exciting innovation, to 
increasing trust and transparency. Building strong and trustworthy 
data ecosystems that can deliver value to businesses and society 
requires collaboration from a wide range of stakeholders, and we 
welcome LawtechUK’s leadership in this area.”
Diana Szasz, 
Data Ecosystems and Innovation programme lead at the ODI
This report does not represent government policy
Purpose
The legal world has yet to fully embrace the opportunities of data, 
in decision-making, risk-mitigation, innovation, efficiency and value 
generation. The Legal Data Vision is about changing that. 
A strong, trustworthy legal data ecosystem will support better decision-
making, drive innovation and the creation of more effective and 
efficient services, fuel growth and productivity, and ultimately benefit 
society. Responsible access and widespread use of data is critical to 
the future success of the legal sector and those who rely on it. 
Individual organisations alone cannot unlock the full potential of 
legal data and navigate the associated ethical, privacy and security 
considerations. Only collective action across the legal data ecosystem, 
from individuals, organisations, government and regulators, can 
establish the data assets, processes, standards and best practices that 
will ensure the trustworthy use of data to meet society’s needs. 
The Legal Data Vision represents a collective first step on the journey 
towards leveraging legal data to drive innovation and build a strong, 
The Legal Data Vision
The Legal Data Vision
is a shared aim for the legal sector to prioritise the 
responsible use of and access to legal data to drive 
innovation, uphold trust and deliver outcomes that 
benefit those we serve

4
What is Legal Data? 
Legal teams use and generate valuable data in multiple formats, 
from every corner of their operations and client work. It comes from 
legal documents, knowledge banks, spreadsheets, sales systems, 
time recording, billing systems, forms, approval flows, policies, emails 
and external sources such as case law and legislation.  It is collected, 
produced and used across all practice areas, from corporate and 
commercial, to family, to property, contentious and non-contentious.  
This data, by virtue of its relevance to legal work, is classified as ‘legal 
data’.  It covers a wide range, and is defined as follows:
The scope of The Legal Data Vision is legal data within a commercial 
and operational context, mindful of the work being undertaken on 
providing access to public sources of data, such as the court reform 
programme and the impending publication of court and tribunal 
judgements via the National Archives - developments that are critical 
to transparency, open justice and the growth of lawtech.  The scope 
includes use of commercial and operational data to benefit wider 
society, for example through projects like the Lawtech Sandbox.  
Use cases for Legal Data
Greater capture, use and shared access to legal data can improve 
efficiency, productivity and transparency, support better decision 
making, identify new  business models and revenue lines, and create 
opportunities to address unmet and excluded legal needs through 
data-led innovation.
The goal is not to exploit legal data. Rather, legal data should be 
seen as a valuable resource that can drive innovation and help 
legal services deliver positive outcomes. Similarly, the goal is not to 
make all legal data open access: confidentiality and legal privilege 
are critical to legal services, and sensitive information needs to be 
protected and intellectual property rights respected. 
The Legal Data Vision
Data used or generated in legal activities within organisations.

5
Examples of how data can be harnessed in the legal sector 
The opportunities of increased insights
• Insights from historic contracts inform decision-making and help 
manage risk, such as understanding aggregate or typical liability 
exposure, flagging anomalies or contracts outside compliance 
and risk tolerance, identifying revenue opportunities, and 
automating reporting or linking to data between systems.  
• Collective access to such contract insights provides a greater 
range of intelligence, to  reduce delay, complexity, and cost 
in negotiations, and help quantify risk, by identifying market 
standards and trends. Linking this through to legislation and 
court data can further support decision-making, for example by 
identifying contract clauses that result in court action and of what 
quantum. 
• Organisations are seeking to understand, track and address 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks and take 
increased responsibility for ESG. Sharing insights on ESG across 
the legal community can help address the collective challenges, 
e.g. an open source ESG risk database. 
The opportunities of increased supply efficiencies
• Standardising work requests enables insights to be gathered from 
structured data to improve operational efficiency. For example, 
structured intake forms capture and evaluate client demand, 
repeat requests, and opportunities for automation. 
• A common lexicon for describing legal matters and data would 
help the evaluation of what a piece of legal work should cost, 
and transparency and trust between legal practitioners and their 
clients. It could also be used to develop systems for repeatable 
legal processes and technology to streamline services and help 
identify new business models and ways of working.   
• Legal service provider performance data, and information about 
quality standards and statistics covering diversity and inclusion, 
sustainability etc, enables clients to benchmark, compare and 
evaluate the services they receive from different providers. 
The same data enables service providers to evaluate their own 
performance, report to clients and regulators, and demonstrate 
their standing in the market.  
• Standardised labelling, data capture and protocols supports 
interoperability between applications and facilitates data 
portability between partners and suppliers. 
   
The opportunities of developing lawtech
• Legal data can be used to train and refine machine learning and 
artificial intelligence algorithms, build high quality, labelled data 
sets and improve third-party lawtech solutions. It can inform 
the development of in-house tools, new and improved products, 
services and processes.  It can be used to build lawtech solutions 
to address unmet legal needs and access to justice. 
• For example: (a) data from commercial and corporate agreements 
for the development of contract review tools for small businesses, 
(b) law firm complaint data for tools to help consumers choose the 
right legal professional, and (c) data from tenancy agreements 
and employment contracts can be used to develop DIY tools to 
help consumers understand their rights and responsibilities when 
dealing with landlords or handling employment grievances. 
The Legal Data Vision

6
business environment.  Many people working in the legal sector already 
recognise this and are pro-actively using legal data to meet specific 
legal needs and to support innovation.
In order to unlock the value of legal data held within the sector, there 
needs to be a shared vision to treat data as an asset and to work 
together as a community to increase the capture, use and access to this 
asset, so it can bring benefits to the sector and to society more broadly. 
A Legal Data Framework
Unlocking the power of legal data will be a journey. The shared purpose 
outlined in this Legal Data Vision is a foundational step on that journey.
Alongside The Legal Data Vision is a Legal Data Framework that any 
organisation and the legal sector as a whole can use when thinking 
about relationships and progress with legal data.  The framework 
looks across three dimensions: within teams (I), between teams and 
organisations (we), and collectively across the sector (all of us). 
A Shared Vision for the Sector
The volume of data is growing exponentially and organisations are 
operating under the constraints of increasing complexity, uncertainty 
and scrutiny.  The traditional, largely manual methods the legal sector 
has used in its work are no longer appropriate for the 21st century 
The Legal Data Vision
The Legal Data Framework
Why we need a Shared Legal Data Vision 
LawtechUK identified the need for a shared purpose on legal data 
through its cross-sector work programme, where a lack of (a) high-quality 
usable data, (b) appreciation for and capability with data, and (c) data 
use and access, presented a recurring challenge for legal innovation. 
More commentary can be found in the LawtechUK report Shaping the 
Future of Law.   
Research commissioned by the UK Department for Digital, Culture, 
Media and Sport, highlights barriers across sectors, including regulatory 
uncertainty, lack of knowledge, costs and resourcing, and lack of 
incentive. LawteckUK’s research largely mirrored these findings for the 
legal sector and identified the lack of a shared vision, framework and 
standards on use of and access to legal data as  a key priority to address, 
highlighting five key challenges:
• No shared vision or framework for improving access to data for 
the legal sector 
• Poor understanding about data, leading to lack of investment 
• Perceived privacy and/or client confidentiality concerns 
• Inconsistent approach to legal data governance and use 
•  Lack of standards for legal data taxonomies and schemas
ALL OF US: 
Contributing to 
collective legal data 
initiatives for the 
sector and society
WE: Enabling 
interoperability
between teams
and organisations
I: Treating legal 
data as a 
valuable asset 
within a team

7
The Legal Data Vision
When it comes to increasing and ensuring responsible access to data, 
one can view the opportunities for doing this on a spectrum from 
closed to shared to open data. There is a common misconception that 
all types of legal data are sensitive and confidential and therefore 
should not be shared.  In fact, a good proportion of legal data is 
neither sensitive nor confidential and/or can be accessed securely, 
without using or exposing anything confidential.  This forms the basis 
of the ‘Open Legal’ concept shared in the LawtechUK report Shaping 
the Future of Law.

8
“As we learnt on a proof of concept testing sharing legal data 
between legal teams and regulators, harnessing legal data is not 
without challenge.  Where confidentiality is paramount, technology 
often misunderstood and time and resources precious, legal 
businesses and teams have stalled using their data. However, with 
privacy enhancing technologies more advanced and regulators ready 
to support, now is the time for legal businesses and teams that want 
to lead to begin their data journey.”
Alexandra Lennox, 
Head of LawtechUK, Tech Nation
The Legal Data Framework in practice 
The Legal Data Framework is applicable to a wide range of 
businesses, organisations and teams, including in-house legal 
departments, legal businesses, lawtech pioneers, and others across 
the public and private sector.  Each organisation and individual 
will have different experiences and skills around data and different 
motivations and concerns around using it and increasing shared 
access to it. We understand that those who participate will apply 
the Legal Data Framework according to their own pace, needs and 
priorities, and contribute in their own way to achieving The Legal Data 
Vision overall. 
The Legal Data Vision
‘I’
 I recognise legal data as a valuable asset within my team
Legal data is a valuable asset to be treated as such, and 
managed responsibly to make it easier to access and use, such 
as capturing it in usable formats, harnessing useful insights from 
it, and building data capability and literacy to know how to work 
with it. 
 
‘ We’ 
We will explore how to improve the use of and access to legal 
data between the teams and organisations we work with
Working together between teams, service providers, clients and 
others is key to the effective use of legal data, such as enabling 
portability of legal data, interoperability of systems, and 
responsible access to shared insights. 
‘All of Us’ 
We welcome collaboration in legal data initiatives for the 
sector and society
Collaboration and shared learning within the legal sector as 
a whole, and with other sectors, will help identify and realise 
opportunities to use legal data to address collective challenges 
and deliver sector, economic and societal growth, such as 
through developing common data standards and lexicons, 
datasets and resources, and testing new approaches and 
technologies.  

9
A range of resources are available to help the legal community adopt 
The Legal Data Vision.  These can be tailored to different levels of legal 
data maturity and organisational goals, and built upon over time.
An ongoing journey
Harnessing data and applying the technologies it enables is an 
ongoing process, and the capabilities, understanding, and 
responsibilities of the legal community will advance and evolve  
over time. 
There is an opportunity for the legal and technology communities not 
only to work individually towards the aims of The Legal Data Vision, 
but also to work together to build out the roadmap for progress, 
develop detailed use cases, and maximise their impact.  
Many people within the legal sector are already working on different 
aspects of the legal data journey, in the UK and worldwide.  There is 
an opportunity to connect all the various work and related resources 
globally.  Open dialogue, debate and collaboration towards a 
common approach and standards will make it easier for people and 
organisations to share, access and use better quality data, including 
shared vocabularies and common language. There are many aspects 
to tackle and embrace.  
Realising The Legal Data Vision will shape the evolution of the legal 
sector for the people and organisations we serve. Your engagement, 
work and contributions on legal data are key to achieving this - we 
can each identify and prioritise opportunities and actions more 
relevant to our work, and forge those forward in collaboration to 
transform our sector.  And as technology development continues 
at pace, we can share ideas, successes and lessons learnt.  At 
LawtechUK we will continue to play our part in identifying and 
tackling sector challenges head on and bringing people together 
through our targeted work programme.
The Legal Data Vision
Join the movement
Add your voice to The Legal Data Vision by providing a 
quote or case study via our contact form here, and share 
your experiences, ideas, challenges and commitments 
on LawtechUK’s social channels with the hashtag 
#legaldatavision.
Twitter - @lawtech_UK
LinkedIn - lawtechuk

10
The Legal Data Vision
About the development of The Legal Data Vision
The Legal Data Vision is the result of a project led by LawtechUK 
and the Open Data Institute, working with a range of cross-
sector experts. 
The Legal Data Vision was developed with a diverse range of 
leaders and experts in the public and private sector over six 
months.  Those leaders and experts helped inform and develop 
the Vision. The insights and work completed can be found here.  
LawtechUK is a government funded initiative within Tech 
Nation, and has led the work to develop The Legal Data Vision 
as part of its work programme to support the transformation 
of the legal sector through technology, providing the strategy, 
framework, network and programme leadership and delivery.
The Open Data Institute is a non-profit organisation that exists 
to help build an open, trustworthy data ecosystem.  The ODI 
has provided cross-industry learnings and insights, undertaken 
qualitative and desk-based research, provided resources, 
contacts and tools, and supported project delivery.  

11
“Technology and data may be the answer to governance in 
corporations and governance in society. The legal profession must 
not be asleep at the wheel or allow the rule of law to be degraded. 
Technology can enable better adherence to legal requirements as a 
matter of course and data can record the truth of what is happening.”
Rosemary Martin, 
Group General Counsel and Company Secretary, Vodafone Group Plc, 
and LawtechUK Panel member
“Data-driven insight is one of the four pillars of my department’s 
Knowledge, Capability and Innovation strategy. But I think we all 
acknowledge that data drives almost everything our profession 
seeks to achieve for our sector and our society. I have been pleased 
to contribute to the creation of the Legal Data Vision and welcome 
its focus on how ‘I’ and ‘We’ and ‘All of us’ can work collectively to 
achieve the ambition it sets.”
Ruth Ward, 
Director of Knowledge, Government Legal Department
“This work will give greater focus to the benefits that utilising legal  
data can undoubtedly bring whether it be from delivering better 
outcomes or greater customer satisfaction. If we can unlock this I 
have no doubt we can harness the benefits that other sectors have 
seen through end to end digital journeys and automation.”
Chris Fowler, 
General Counsel BT Technology, BT Group plc
The Legal Data Vision
Reflections from the legal community 
on The Legal Data Vision
“By 2030, our legal and court services will have been transformed by 
technologies that have not yet been invented. In this era of increasingly 
capable systems and ubiquitous online service, clients and court users 
will be much more focused on the outcomes that these systems and 
services deliver than in perpetuating our old ways of working. The 
dominant role of technology will not be to streamline and improve 
twentieth century processes. It will be to enable us to deliver outcomes 
and a level of accessibility that were simply impossible in the analogue 
world. Data will be at the heart of this fundamental change – both to 
measure our progress and to fuel the systems themselves, many of which 
will be based on machine learning. Accordingly, we require policies and 
practices that strongly support the capture and re-use of justice data.”
Professor Richard Susskind, 
Author, President of the Society for Computers and Law, LawtechUK 
Panel member
“We have seen the transformative effects that implementing new 
technology and using data can have on so many industries. In legal, 
whether its contracts, litigation or legal processes, most of the data 
within the industry still sits untapped, locked within traditional working 
practices and analogue documents. This is however changing. Digital 
delivery platforms and AI technologies are increasingly being used by 
legal teams to capture, analyse and evaluate data. By harnessing the 
data they have, organisations will be better able to proactively manage 
legal risks, improve efficiencies and enhance their service levels, 
either internally or to clients. There is also a far bigger opportunity 
- by responsibly sharing some of this data, the legal community will 
collectively benefit, whether that’s through managing shared risks, 
driving further innovation in the sector or enhancing access to justice.”
Bruce Braude, 
Chief Technology Officer, Deloitte Legal UK

12
“‘Data’ – and how we use it – is a recurring theme when we’re looking 
at symptoms and causes of some of the biggest challenges in our 
organisation. And it is a fundamental enabler to achieving our 
business vision and strategy. The work of the in-house legal team is 
key in unlocking the real potential of data and our internal clients 
have figured that out! But we can’t do it alone. I truly believe that we 
can only drive this forward if we break down the silos within – and 
work across - the legal ecosystem; and I’m really excited about the 
Legal Data Vision.”
Mark Gregory, 
General Counsel, Rolls-Royce plc
“We are working collectively with others in the sector to build an 
environment where data-driven legal professionals will be able to 
put information into the hands of the curious, the investigative, and 
the analytical so that they can explore, understand, and creatively 
address their client’s business, legal, risk and strategy problems. 
As this Legal Data Vision project has shown, we need to work 
collectively, on a cross-sector basis to make this a reality.”
Sam Grange, 
Knowledge Engineer, iManage
The Legal Data Vision
“Better use of data has become imperative for the businesses the 
legal sector serves, otherwise companies will miss out on discovering 
insights that drive innovation and lead to new ideas. Through the 
power of data, we can improve our understanding of balancing risk 
and opportunities, and  enable businesses to make higher quality 
strategic and revenue generating decisions. We need a collective 
vision for the sector to ensure that laws and regulations create 
playing fields that are transparent, level and competitive.”
Matthew Wilson, 
General Counsel, Fremantle
“Data is the single highest priority for our members at the Digital 
Legal Exchange. Access to the right data is critical for corporate legal 
departments seeking to track, report on and comply with complex 
ESG obligations. Sharing data and insights across the legal ecosystem 
can help to address this challenge.”
Isabel Parker, 
Executive Director, The Digital Legal Exchange
“Being able to manage, understand and gain insights from all the 
data that we are producing will transform not only the business of 
law but our global society. Focusing on practical and ethical ways to 
harvest and harness this wealth of information could lead to solutions 
to some of our most challenging issues. It’s not easy, but it is hugely 
important and LawtechUK is well placed to convene those who may 
be able to come up with the answers.”
Christina Blacklaws, 
LawtechUK Panel Chair

13
“6 years ago in Vodafone Business Legal, we had very little data in 
the team, we didn’t know how many contracts were being supported, 
who was supporting them and whether we were supporting the right 
things.  Starting small (initially using excel and then migrating to a 
CLM platform) we started tracking the data.  We now know what we 
are working on, which team or individual is supporting a matter, we 
can prioritise work based on value, understand how long it takes us 
to assign work, prepare a first draft, negotiate a contract and sign 
a contract.  We can also notify our commercial colleagues when a 
contract needs renewal or the customer hasn’t met all its financial 
commitments.  Having data has revolutionised the way we work, and 
we now wonder how we ran the department without it.”
Amy McConnell, 
Head of Legal Operations & Business Contracting, Vodafone Group plc
“There are some things that can be done on a team level right now.  
At GoCardless we have centralised and standardised incoming work 
requests, so we can gather and report insights from structured data, 
using a customised version of Jira Service Desk. We have also built 
tooling into our CRM (Salesforce) that provides us with lots of data on 
our contracts, including automatic allocation of a deal ‘colour’ that 
allows us to tailor the legal team’s support and SLAs based upon deal 
categorisation.  Treating data as a valuable asset, and collecting and 
capturing it as such allows us to forecast more effectively as a team 
and to provide a better service for our internal and external clients.”
Ahmed Badr, 
Chief Legal & Risk Officer, GoCardless
The Legal Data Vision
“Data mining to identify opportunities and risks is achievable but 
requires an output driven lens - what are we collecting, who would 
benefit from it and what does it tell us. Individual legal teams or 
providers should utilise the vast data they have in existing tech stacks 
and data, such as comparative score cards, intake and self-serve 
processes, and evaluating value pyramids to demonstrate value.   As 
a sector we’ve talked about data for a long time, The Legal Data 
Vision is  moving to now doing something about it collectively.”
Mo Zain Ajaz, 
Founder, LEx360
“Data is often the blind spot of corporate legal teams. Without access 
to reliable data - at both an individual legal team and industry level 
- in-house teams are unable to make informed decisions about their 
functions: including where to deploy resource, when to change tack 
and how best to improve service delivery. A unified Legal Data Vision 
will go a long way to helping legal teams and their businesses make 
better decisions.”
Electra Japonas, 
Co-Founder, OneNDA
“The legal function-- like business-- must create a data-backed 
culture and architecture designed for customers and society. The goal 
is to access, analyze, apply, share, and protect data to enable faster 
risk detection, mitigation, and early-resolution as well as to promote 
better informed decision-making that positively impacts business and 
society-at-large.”
Mark Cohen, 
Executive Chairman, The Digital Legal Exchange

14
“Outright data sharing is an antiquated model. It is highly inefficient 
for data controllers and it does not protect data subjects. This 
does not mean however that data must stay closed.  There are now 
technologies available that can enable collaboration between 
multiple organisations without data owners ever relinquishing control 
of their data. Cross-sector collaborations like the LawtechUK multi-
party legal data access proof of concept are vital for the legal 
sector to realise the opportunities such new technologies bring in the 
context of improving the responsible use of and access to legal data.”
Sally Sfeir-Tait, 
CEO, Regulaition
“The amount of data in organisations is growing exponentially and 
the data maturity of businesses and the legal teams that support 
those businesses needs to keep pace.  There is, rightly, an expectation 
from business leaders that legal will use data in the same way as 
other teams and departments. It is becoming increasingly unfeasible 
for anyone to tackle the legal data challenge alone.  The Legal Data 
Vision is an exciting opportunity for us as a sector to collaborate and 
obtain a level of consistency so we can all evaluate and communicate 
our impact to our wider stakeholders.”
Helen Lowe, 
Head of Legal Operations, easyJet plc
The Legal Data Vision
“Machine learning will be irrelevant in law in the next 10 years, 
instead, it will be replaced with lots and lots of labelled data. Labelled 
legal data that has been reasoned on, discussed, argued and agreed, 
questioned on and answered, and has lawyer summaries attached. 
For us, that has to be the data play for the legal industry. With that 
volume of high quality data; sharing and collaboration becomes 
absolutely critical to ensure a fair and open market, and to avoid 
a small number of large businesses being in control of this type of 
knowledge and expertise. At Travers this is so important to us, we’ve 
open sourced our Etatonna labelling platform to give the market a 
head start. Etatonna is currently enabling many of our competitors, 
who share this vision with us, to label their own legal data.  We 
are committed to cross industry collaboration and to being at the 
forefront of data labelling, to ensure we drive a better future for the 
clients of our industry.”
Shawn Curran, 
Head of Legal Technology, Travers Smith
“As the legal industry continues to mature its digital and data 
capabilities, the need for intra-industry collaboration has become 
ever more apparent. Participating in cross-sector initiatives, like the 
LawtechUK Sandbox and the LawtechUK multi party data access 
proof of concept have helped us to frame our own data challenges 
within the context of the wider industry, as well as to gain hands-
on experience with the technologies available to accelerate our 
ability to extract greater value from our data, develop our internal 
DigitalDNA and create better and tailored experiences for our clients 
in an increasingly data driven and digitalised environment.”
Tara Waters, 
Partner, Head of Ashurst Advance Digital

15
“Being part of the LawtechUK multi party legal data access proof 
of concept challenged us to think differently about the data we 
hold and how it can be leveraged. Working closely with a diverse 
stakeholder group provided the perfect platform for examining how 
new and emerging technologies  can be used to facilitate responsible 
and controlled access to data insights. But, we have to get the 
foundations right first. Agreeing industry standards and acceptance 
on sharing insights are two key challenges which the legal sector 
needs to continue to work towards.  If we can get this right, the 
potential gains are many multiples larger than the sum of parts.”
Jeremy Coleman, 
Head of Innovation, Norton Rose Fulbright
“Data is a priority for us, as it is for many organisations and in house 
teams. We all work in environments where data is key. We need to 
work together on a shared understanding of how best to make use 
of legal data so we can not only be proactive in advising on risks but 
also make best use of the benefits it brings to our organisations.”
Juliet Oliver, 
General Counsel, Solicitors Regulatory Authority
The Legal Data Vision
“Data is an important enabler to delivering fairer outcomes, stronger 
confidence and better services that meet society’s needs. We know 
from our research that consumers find it difficult to access information 
on price, service and quality. One dimension of this is ensuring that 
regulatory information is easily accessible. Regulators are already 
working together to support consistent and accessible regulatory 
information for consumers, in line with recommendations from the CMA 
on a “single digital register”. Regulators have an important role to play 
in supporting an open-by-default data ecosystem in the legal sector.”
Aisling O’Connell, 
Technology and Innovation Policy Lead, Legal Services Board and 
LawtechUK Regulatory Response Unit Panel Member
“The work being done by LawtechUK on data [sharing] could contribute 
meaningfully to the access to justice agenda in the UK. By way of one 
simple example: by combining collections of everyday contracts such 
as employment contracts, terms and conditions or tenancy agreements 
with existing machine learning capabilities it would be possible to 
create simple tools that would allow a user to upload a document 
that they were being asked to sign and to get guidance on unusual or 
missing terms. Today, there is a power imbalance between the well-
advised businesses on the one hand and consumers, who can rarely 
afford to take legal advice on such matters, on the other. Building such 
data collections to enable these legal guidance products is incredibly 
challenging for private business, for a host of reasons. With LawtechUK 
or another “safe” data controller at the helm we could bring these 
ideas to fruition - with wider access to data, would come wider access 
to legal guidance and ultimately better consumer protection.”
Nick West, 
Chief Strategy Officer, Mishcon de Reya LLP

16
“At DWF we see data as one of the single biggest factors that will 
enable our business to deliver more impactful innovation. Being 
able to access and utilise larger and more consistently curated data 
sets, is key to our ability to push more breakthrough innovations 
that change how services are delivered rather just augment what 
is already done. From our experience so far I  don’t see individual 
organisations focussed on their own data getting us there, it will take 
collaboration and a common vision.”
Jonathan Paterson, 
Managing Director - Innovation & Ventures, DWF
“With the proliferation of technology and data increasingly available 
across the legal profession, there is an obligation and opportunity 
for the legal profession to work collectively to ensure data and data 
insights are treated responsibly. Working together, data can be a 
powerful tool that drives both innovation and action – providing a 
robust foundation to foresee trends and measure impact against to 
hold the profession accountable to the Rule of Law. LawtechUK is 
perfectly placed to help shape a consistent and joint approach to 
realise the potential for good of open data in law.”
Dana Denis-Smith, 
CEO, Obelisk Support and Founder of the First 100 Years Project
The Legal Data Vision
“There is huge potential for better access to and use of data to 
support the legal sector across a range of opportunities, from risk 
management, to trend analysis and resilience - preventing issues 
not only cleaning up after them. Unlocking the value of data might 
seem overwhelming, but it doesn’t need to be, and it is critical for 
the legal sector to embrace it, if we are to attract and retain the next 
generation of talent.”
Ryan Swann, 
Chief Legal and Risk Officer, Think Money Group
“To truly harness the power of legal data, we need to collaborate.  
Those who create data aren’t always the ones who store it, those who 
store it aren’t always the ones who own it, those who own it aren’t the 
ones to analyse it, and those who can analyse it don’t have access to 
it.  To unlock, all these groups need to come together.  We know it’s 
possible, we’ve seen it happen in the Lawtech Sandbox, we now need 
it to happen at even greater scale.  The first steps have already been 
taken and a community is coming together with a shared interest 
and desire to solve the data problem.  We need more organisations 
to step forward and be brave.  The opportunities are immense, think 
about having the ability to get a 360 view of commercial contracts, 
understanding how the law works in practice and knowing the 
implications of every clause, every regulation – from drafting right up 
to when it is being tested in a litigation. What’s the first data set we 
tackle? Who’s the first to open the data vault?”
Chris Grant, 
LawtechUK Panel member

17
“Machines can greatly support humans in enhancing their 
understanding and improving the efficiency of huge volumes of data. 
This is proven and is as equally true for the legal industry as for, say, 
medicine or finance.  Think of ‘machines’ as intelligent assistants, 
rather than artificial intelligence – and it makes more sense.  However 
– for these machines to be effective and for them to ‘assist’ in a 
meaningful way – they need to be trained using lots of data, the more 
data the better for the machines and the better for humans that work 
with them.  Ultimately better for the ‘end client’ of legal services.  
Data, rightly, needs to be protected.  But as with humans –a lesson 
(or pattern) learned from that data is not the same as the data itself 
(we often forget the facts but retain how we solved the problem) and 
thus we need to find a common approach to accessing this data in 
a way that enhances the industry (lessons learned) yet protects the 
individual (personal data).  Surely if there was a sector that could 
draft such a protocol – it has to be the legal sector.  We need to step 
up and solve this today for the benefit of those we serve tomorrow.”
Stephen Allen, 
Vice President, Elevate Services 
The Legal Data Vision
“The opportunities of open legal as part of The Legal Data Vision 
are exciting. Access to aggregated data insights from risk and 
compliance in relation to government regulations would benefit 
providers and clients alike. In corporate legal services, bilateral and 
multi-lateral data sharing enable lawtech startups to train their AI 
tools. In consumer-facing legal services, access to state-level data 
is essential for service development and delivery.  Collaboration on 
good data governance, priority setting by data type and the potential 
value data aggregation can unlock, and harnessing network effects, 
are essential, as part of a collective ecosystem approach, alongside 
use of privacy-preserving machine learning technology.”
Mari Sako, 
Professor of Management Studies, Saïd Business School, University  
of Oxford
“There is no doubt the benefits the Legal Data Vision will bring. From 
one end of the spectrum for legal firms, how they operate, how they 
manage risk to how they can transform their services. Through to the 
other end and the experience for litigants in person and the ability 
to access justice in a simple, consistent and positive manner.  The 
continual advancement in technology and the increasing use within 
the sector does mean that to achieve this vision a common ground 
needs to be found. Data capture, data sharing, interoperability, 
data standards and security are all key. At the same time so is the 
engagement throughout the entire process, through the Courts, 
Tribunals and beyond, to ensure that this vision continues to drive up 
standards and quality, whilst at the same time reducing complexity, 
costs and time regardless of what stage in the process.”
Simon Bradford, 
Regional Vice President, Public Sector UK, Salesforce

18
“Data is key to legal technology innovation but it can be challenging 
to access due to considerations around client confidentiality and 
Legal Professional Privilege (LLP). The Law Society of Scotland is 
committed to helping those holding data to understand what can and 
cannot be released, while ensuring our rules and guidance is a clear 
as it can be.”
Paul Mosson, 
Director of Member Services, Law Society of Scotland
“The legal profession is only starting to grasp the potential of what 
it can do for itself and for its clients through the use of data. But at 
the moment we all have only a small subset of the available data 
quite often stored in disparate systems and not always captured 
consistently nor captured in a format that enables it to be accessed 
easily. A common framework that enables the capture of industry 
wide standard data sets that, in turn, can be made available for reuse 
within the regulatory and statutory frame work in which we need to 
operate will accelerate what the industry will be able to achieve for 
its clients.”
Stuart Whittle, 
Business Services and Innovation Director, Partner, Weightmans
The Legal Data Vision

19

