



Contents
Background2
Approach4
Terminology of data ecosystems6
Data Ecosystem Map8
Key findings10
Barriers preventing access, use and sharing of data10
Opportunities to improve access, use and sharing of data11
Recommendations13
Immediate priority13
Short term recommendations (3 months)14
Medium term recommendations (3 - 12 months)16
Long term recommendations (12 months or longer)17
About
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and
published in November 2021. Its lead authors were Ben Snaith and James Maddison.
If you want to share feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact the
project lead James Maddison atresearch@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector1

Background
Developing and maintaining an inclusive and sustainable education and employment
ecosystem plays an important role in the economic growth of local areas. Data is a
core part of any effective modern ecosystem, for example, people seeking
employment need to know what employers are looking for, and education providers
need to understand how to align their offerings with market demands. In order to
ensure that people have access to the data they need to make informed choices, the
data that is part of those education and employment ecosystems need to be more
open, while still maintaining the trust of stakeholders and those who have rights over
that data.
West London Business is a business led non-profit whose members collaborate to
raise West London’s global economic competitiveness and catalyse action for people
and planet. The West London Alliance is a public sector partnership between seven
West London local authorities. Together these organisations have been working with
stakeholders from across West London to understand how access to skills data could
help to improve the responsiveness of skills provision within the region and ensure
appropriate commissioning of education provision to support green skills and a
transition to a zero carbon economy.
In 2020, the West London Alliance commissioned the Institute for Employment
Studies and Rocket Science to deliver insights into demand for and supply of skills
across seven West London boroughs, with a view to making better data available to
enable the skills system to be more responsive. In parallel, West London Alliance and
West London Business, with support from the Tech for Better programme, worked to
develop a Minimum Viable Product (MVP)websitethatsought to collate data about
green construction job profiles and information on relevant courses from Higher
Education (HE) and Further Education (FE) providers in West London.
These initial efforts identified what issues currently affect how data is being accessed,
used and shared across the West London education ecosystem, including:
●
a lack of clear, openly available, timely and accurate data about the demand
for skills, and at a sufficiently granular level of detail
●
difficulty clearly identifying where specific gaps in skills provision lie, due to
lack of available information
●
a lack of data standards particularly around data about the supply side, for
example general course profiles for FE courses, which makes it hard to
compare and integrate similar datasets
●
a lack of easy accessibility to supply side data, causing a larger manual
working requirement for those wishing to use the data
As a first step towards addressing these issues and trying to identify opportunities to
move forward in improving access to skills data for West London, the Open Data
Institute (ODI) worked with West London Business, West London Alliance and
partners to run a Data Ecosystem Mapping workshop. The study has been
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector2

commissioned by West London Business as part of Better Futures+, with funding
from The Mayor of London’s Green New Deal.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector3

Approach
A data ecosystem map illustrates the value exchanges in a data ecosystem, which
consists of the organisations, communities and people that create and benefit from
the value created by the data flowing through our data infrastructure. Creating a map
can help stakeholders understand and explain where and how the use of data creates
value, and to identify the key users, the relationships between them, and the different
roles they play.
On Friday 9 July 2021, the ODI ran a Data Ecosystem Mapping workshop for a group
of 20 stakeholders from West London’s education data ecosystem, with support from
West London Business, West London Alliance and partners. The objectives of the
workshop were as follows:
●
Introduce the relevant ODI concepts of data ecosystem mapping, data
infrastructure and the data spectrum.
●
Teach participants how to map a data ecosystem, including data assets,
value flows and stakeholders.
●
Use the knowledge of participants in the room to create a data ecosystem
map for the Education Sector.
●
Use the data ecosystem ma to identify what concrete steps  can be taken to
improve the data ecosystem or fulfill the use case needs.
To provide a balanced set of perspectives, stakeholders were assembled from
varying organisation types and roles, including:
●
Further education colleges
●
Higher education institutions
●
Independent training providers
●
Local government skills and employment leads
●
Greater London Authority representatives
●
Department for Work and Pensions representatives
Participants worked together in two separate breakout sessions to map their
understanding of the West London education data ecosystem. They used the
following use cases to help them think about important stakeholders, data and other
value flows, where the current gaps in the ecosystem exist and where there might be
opportunities to improve access to data:
●
Enabling the skills system to be more responsive through insights into
demand for and supply of skills across seven West London Boroughs, with
the overarching aim being to make available better data to enable the skills
system to be more responsive, for example, by helping skills providers,
funders and policymakers to better understand gaps in provision and how
best to address them.
●
Collating data about green construction job profiles and information on
relevant courses from Higher Education (HE) and Further Education (FE)
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector4

providers in West London, with the aim of encouraging more people to take
HE and FE courses in green construction, by making data about green
construction jobs more easily accessible.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector5

Terminology of data
ecosystems
Actors- The people and organisations that are activewithin the ecosystem. They can
include a wide variety of stakeholders such as data stewards, regulators,
intermediaries, aggregators, creators, beneficiaries, researchers, policymakers and
more.
1
Aggregator- A type of intermediary, an aggregatoris a person or organisation that
packages together datasets from many sources.
Algorithm- An algorithm is the list of instructionsand rules that a computer needs to
do to complete a task.
2
In the context of this work,algorithms might be used to
match supply data with demand to identify gaps or oversupply.
Datasets- A dataset is a collection of data. Datasetscan be raw data, collected for
research or monitoring purposes, but a dataset could also be a combination of data
collected by others, or the output of a model or analysis. Datasets are often used to
enable the development of tools which can produce information, ultimately helping us
to make more informed decisions.
Data assets- A data asset is what is considered tobe a ‘useful or valuable thing’
relating to data. While this description is fairly vague, the term data asset most
commonly refers to three types of asset: identifiers, registers and datasets.
Data governance- The exercise of authority, controland shared decision making
(planning, monitoring and enforcement), over the management of data assets.
3
Data identifiers- Identifiers are names that actas labels to help us uniquely identify
physical and digital objects and services, and as pointers to information available
online or stored in a variety of databases and systems.
4
Data infrastructure- Consists of data assets, standardsand technologies, guidance
and policies, organisations and communities.
5
We needstrong data infrastructure in
order to be able to collect, access, use and share data, which helps us to create
value and minimises harmful impacts.
Data steward- A person or organisation responsiblefor collecting, managing and
ensuring access to a dataset. A data steward may also provide other supporting
infrastructure, such as data governance.
Data standards- Standards are documented, reusableagreements that solve a
specific set of problems or meet clearly defined needs.
6
Data standards can create a
number of benefits if widely adopted, helping people to use the same vocabulary and
language by using common models, attributes and definitions. Data standards can
enable better exchange of data within and between organisations using common
6
https://standards.theodi.org/introduction/what-are-open-standards-for-data/
5
https://open-data-institute.gitbook.io/data-landscape-playbook/who-is-this-playbook-for-1
4
https://theodi.org/article/explainer-what-is-an-identifier/
3
https://www.cio.com/article/3521011/what-is-data-governance-a-best-practices-framework-for-managing-
data-assets.html
2
https://www.thinkautomation.com/eli5/what-is-an-algorithm-an-in-a-nutshell-explanation/
1
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vSqoHOYT5u6vrCHIebCS0rze0gWwXOspeEowWzwake8/edit#hea
ding=h.1jfx30agj1s6
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector6

formats and shared rules. Standards can also provide guidance and
recommendations for sharing better quality data, and understanding processes and
information flow.
File format- Refers to the structure of a file thattells a program how to display its
contents.
7
Common file formats include text, image,video and sound.
Intermediary- A person or organisation that providesvalue-added services that
wrap, host or enrich a dataset.
Open API- An Application Programming Interface (API)is best described as a
promise by one system to another on how the two can interact. The human API is our
spoken and written language; it is how we interact.
8
When APIs are made openly
available, developers and other users can access and use data provided through the
API to integrate with their own applications.
Registers- Registers are lists of data used to classifyor categorise other data that
help to improve the consistency and quality in how data is published and used. They
help us to build confidence and trust in data by clarifying where different data
stewards are referring to the same things in the same way.
Taxonomy- The process or system of describing theway in which different things
are related by putting them in groups.
9
9
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/taxonomy
8
https://theodi.org/article/publishing-open-data-in-times-of-crisis/
7
https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/f/file-format.htm
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector7

Data Ecosystem Map
Participants found the initial stages of the mapping exercise straightforward, as they
were all familiar with the majority of stakeholders involved in West London’s
education data ecosystem. They could confidently identify data sources that many of
those stakeholders collected and maintained, such as data about courses and their
providers, or performance data, such as information on the success of schools and
colleges in helping young people continue in education, apprenticeships or
employment (known asdestination measures). Participantscould identify some of the
data flows between organisations, for example, where an education provider is
required to share data with a government department by law, or where an education
provider shares data publicly via a particular platform. They could also clearly identify
where the majority of the funding flows exist within the ecosystem.
Due to the size and complexity of the ecosystem at hand, participants found it
difficult to map much more than the aforementioned information in the time available
at the workshop. Key details about which organisations were sharing data with
another, how they were approaching this and whether there were other value
exchanges taking place were not able to be identified at this stage. As a result, a
number of questions were raised, leading to a more detailed focus on the barriers and
potential opportunities than is usual for a Data Ecosystem Mapping session.
Despite the challenges presented in mapping some of the value flows, as a result of
the workshop, we were able to create the beginnings of a data ecosystem map for
the West London education sector.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector8

Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector9

Key findings
Barriers preventing access, use and sharing of
data
●
Due to a lack of data, marrying up occupation outcomes of courses with
labour market demand is difficult, particularly where courses have multiple
occupational outcomes (HE), as opposed to having a specialist niche (more
likely in FE). This could lead to inaccurate assumptions about which skills are
required to satisfy labour market demand, as these assumptions are not
based on evidence.
●
There is a distinct lack of established standards, both around the taxonomies
used to describe data and in the way that data is captured and identified.
This is particularly prevalent in supply side data that is created by skills
providers and makes it more difficult for organisations wishing to work with
that data to compare different datasets. There are some existing frameworks,
like theXCRI-CAP, which could help to address thisproblem, but to date
uptake in the UK has been limited to postgraduate provision from some
universities. From the demand side, there is no standard way for employers to
articulate their skills needs, which makes it difficult for skills providers to
update their offerings to better meet these needs.
●
It can be difficult to access national data that could be useful at a local level,
as the data holders, such as the Department for Work and Pensions, require
very specific and sometimes restrictive justifications as to why this data
should be shared. For example, national data about skills and the labour
market from the Department for Work and Pensions or elsewhere within
central government, could help skills providers to provide more targeted and
responsive services, such as aggregated data about the skills level and prior
occupations of people who are on Universal Credit (or at risk of redundancy
through the HR1 process) in a locality. Much of this national data is likely
already aggregated and anonymised, or could be with relatively little effort,
and therefore limiting access to the data unnecessarily limits potential
innovation.
●
There is a tendency for national government departments, like the
Department for Education, to develop strategies without input from local
stakeholders who are most affected by the resulting outcomes.
●
There is little data about the people who enter and then leave the West
London labour market (university students from other geographies for
example), which means that it is difficult to know how much of the skills
learnt in West London are being retained by the West London labour market.
●
Some data sources which could support local education ecosystem
decisions involve substantial cost to access making it less accessible for use
by stakeholders (e.g. EMSI Burning Glass).
●
An inability to send data quickly and efficiently can  cause delays in data
sharing between demand and supply, which affects the speed at which
decisions can be made, particularly with regards to adjusting the supply side.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector10

Opportunities to improve access, use and sharing
of data
●
Identifying which software providers are being used by the different skills
providers and  encouraging collaboration and communication between them
in order to improve the way data is accessed and shared via their systems.
West London Vice-Chancellors and Principals have set out opening up data
as a shared objective of their new collaboration. This is strong advocacy for
improving access to data in education, but it will be necessary to explore
what incentives and leadership from their partners will be needed to
accelerate open data sharing.
●
Improving the way supply side data, such as course provision, connects to
demand side data, such as skills needed by West London employers, is
important in making sure that suppliers are able to respond dynamically to
the needs of the market. There is an opportunity to build on the existing work
done by Rocket Science using manual coding of courses with SOC/ SIC
codes.
●
Identifying new use cases for skills and education data could help to
demonstrate the value of improving access to this data to key national data
holders, such as the Department for Work and Pensions.
●
Ensuring that residents of West London who are already in work have access
to data about the provision of skills and how that relates to job opportunities,
so that they can make decisions about adding to their skill set.
●
Improving standardisation, starting with the taxonomies used to describe
data benefits the whole ecosystem by giving everyone a shared language.
Improving technical standards will improve the way that organisations are
then able to access and share this information.
●
Student barometer, provided byTribal, which tracksand compares the
decision-making, expectations, perceptions and intentions of students from
application to graduation. This information is not publicly available.
●
There is an opportunity to engage with data initiatives and projects that were
identified during the session, which may have useful datasets or data
standards that could be made openly available, or may already be openly
available. These initiatives and projects should be engaged as part of further
work. Initiatives and projects include:
○
Jisc, a digital solutions provider for UK educationand research,
which funds a number of projects around data, such as projects
aroundimproving postgraduate course informationandmanaging
course-related information.
○
Jisc has also funded the creation of theXCRI-CAPframework, which
stands for  eXchanging Course Related Information, Course
Advertising Profile. XCRI-CAP is a standard that makes it easier to
move data about courses around. It is used to improve the way staff
do things within their own organisation and in partnership with other
organisations. It gives organisations the capability to offer new and
enhanced services to users of course related information. Its
standard format and common definitions make it possible for
information in different systems to be shared and updated without
having to re-enter data.  The XCRI-CAP framework could be
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector11

augmented by West London partners to include SOC/ SIC codes and
course place information.  It went on to underpin BS 8581-1:2012
Exchanging course related information - Course advertising profile
and EN 15982 Metadata for Learning Opportunities (MLO).
○
LinkedIn, which provides National and City level data that captures
the evolution of skill requirements over time across the workforce
based on updates to LinkedIn member profiles. Made available via
The World Bank.
○
Unistats datasetfrom the HESA website, which providescomparable
sets of information about full- and part-time undergraduate courses,
as well as experimental statistics about graduate outcomes
●
Given the size and complexity of the data ecosystem, a useful activity would
be to identify key data holders from the map which were not engaged in the
initial stages of the project, and work with them to map their internal data
ecosystem. This would be done with a particular focus on the use cases
around better skills provision in order to provide some parameters to the
exercise.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector12

Recommendations
Immediate priority
Create a priority list of use cases that wider data sharing should support, assess
their viability and create a roadmap to execute them working with the relevant
stakeholders
It is important for all work towards improving access to education and skills data be
underpinned by clear use cases that outline how improving access to data can
address a real-world problem. Without these examples, key stakeholders, such as
skills providers and the software providers that they use, are unlikely to adapt their
current approach to making data available.
Two clear use cases have already been established:
●
Enabling the skills system to be more responsive through insights into
demand for and supply of skills across seven West London Boroughs
●
Collating data about green job profiles and information on relevant courses
from Higher Education and Further Education providers in West London
In addition to the two existing use cases, two additional use cases were highlighted
as worth exploring during the workshop:
●
Understanding what better skills provision looks like for those on Universal
Credit
●
Understanding what better skills provision looks like for those at risk of
redundancy, for example leveraging anonymised and aggregated insights
from HR1 submissions broken down by local authority
These use cases should be presented to core project partners, and any additional key
stakeholders that might need to be involved in delivery against said use cases, such
as the Department for Work and Pensions, to get feedback from them as to whether
addressing these use cases would prove useful to the wider ecosystem.
For each use case that is prioritised, a roadmap should be created to more
specifically shape how the following recommendations are undertaken.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector13

Short term recommendations (3 months)
Collate a structured list of relevant data sources that were identified during the
data ecosystem mapping sessionand build on this listthroughout the project
Using the prioritised use cases as a framing, collating a list of all relevant data
sources, including those mentioned in the workshop, will help West London Business
and West London Alliance answer the following questions:
●
What does the current availability of data look like?
●
Who is collecting data that hasn’t been engaged yet?
●
Are there any clear gaps in the available data?
This activity will help West London Business, West London Alliance and partners to
understand who needs to be engaged in order to improve access to the necessary
data and drive forward the chosen use cases.
Identify the main software providers in the ecosystem and establish their role in
future project work
It is important that software providers are engaged with the project as early as
possible, as their systems make it possible to improve access to the data currently
held by skills providers. Engaging with software providers early will give West London
Business, West London Alliance and partners the opportunity to identify how to
incentivise each provider to make changes to their system and improve access to
data.  Adoption of XCRI-CAP by West London HE and FE partners may be a
quick-win.
West London Business and West London Alliance should engage with key skills
providers to identify what their software provision currently looks like and to request
contact details for each provider.
Convene stakeholders who were identified as being a key part of the data
ecosystem during the ecosystem mapping session, or as part of the data
sources list. Work with these key players to understand their internal data
ecosystem and what prevents them from sharing data more openly
During the ecosystem mapping session, a number of stakeholders were identified,
such as skills providers and funding bodies, but participants were unable to go into
detail about what data each organisation is currently collecting and how each
organisation shares that information with other stakeholders, as they did not have the
information to do so.
A clear next step would be to prioritise these key stakeholders and to reach out to
those considered a high priority to establish if they would be willing to engage with
West London Business, West London Alliance and partners around improving access
to the data that they collect and maintain. Those organisations that are willing to
engage would undergo a similar data ecosystem mapping session, using the
parameters of the prioritised use cases as guidance. This session would focus more
on internal data collection and sharing, as well as the blockers that prevent them from
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector14

improving access to data and the opportunities to progress towards this aim. For
example, Jisc advised that data to create XCRI-CAP feeds was sometimes
fragmented across multiple IT systems in a Higher Education Institution (HEI) which
may then also demand collaboration across functions to bring the data together.
Marketing departments are often strong champions of more open course data as it
can ensure they reach as many audiences as possible.
Each session would need to involve individuals from relevant departments and roles
that understand how data is collected and used by the organisation. In particular,
having one or more senior stakeholders present, such as a Chief Data or Digital
Officer, is crucial for securing buy-in for the future of the project. It is also
recommended that, where possible, the organisation’s software provider(s) also joins
the session.
Build on existing Rocket Science research to provide a documented approach
to connecting supply and demand data around skills
This recommendation applies specifically to the first use case around enabling the
skills system to be more responsive.
Existing research fromRocket Science, one of thecore collaborators in the project so
far, has found that there are a number of complicated nuances around connecting
data about the supply of skills to data about the demand for skills. Examples include
how to account for people receiving higher and further education outside of West
London, who then bring those skills back to the region as they join the labour market,
as well as how to differentiate between skills required for jobs that are fairly sector
agnostic, such as a Data Analyst, compared to the skills required for jobs that are
extremely sector specific, such as a Commercial Pilot.
In order to unlock value from supply and demand data, the Rocket Science research
needs to be taken further, addressing nuances using activities like exploring possible
standard taxonomies for supply data, or accessing and analysing more data about
those entering and leaving the labour market. Existing standards such as XCRI-CAP
should be examined to confirm that they can support the standardisation of supply
side course data, and where and how they might be best deployed.
Important considerations for this research should be around how the findings are
documented and managed. These considerations might underpin the logic in a future
algorithm that matches supply and demand in real-time. It will need to be decided
whether the approach to connecting supply and demand data is something managed
centrally, by West London Business, West London Alliance and partners, a third
party, or whether a decentralised approach should be taken, involving other
stakeholders in the ecosystem, like the skills suppliers and their software providers.
Prospects(part of Jisc that improves student andgraduate career outcomes through
information, guidance and opportunities) currently provide the third party intermediary
role aggregating Postgraduate course information from HEIs using XCRI-CAP.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector15

Medium term recommendations (3 - 12 months)
Work with key data providers and the software providers that they use to enable
easier ways of sharing data between two systems or organisations
This recommendation builds directly on all four of the short term recommendations,
by bringing together software providers, data holders, and project partners to
establish how the systems that they currently use to collect and share data could be
adapted to suit the needs of the use cases, and wider needs of improving access to
supply and demand data.
By this point in the project, there should be a good understanding of the datasets
available, so the stakeholders mentioned will need to come together to examine what
adaptations need to be made in order to create a standardised approach to the
following:
●
The taxonomy used to describe supply and demand data, such as the way
skills are described by each organisation
●
The data standards that make data interoperable, such as file format and
common identifiers
●
The technology that enables sharing of data, such as open APIs that enable
efficient and standardised sharing of data
There may also be other adaptations that emerge from the short term activities that
should be incorporated into this activity.
Pivotal to the success of this recommendation is ensuring that key data providers and
software providers understand the value of existing standards such as XCRI-CAP,
and that education leaders champion the implementation of these standards to
support greater cooperation and a better informed marketplace.
Stakeholders should first be brought together for a workshop to make sure they are
on the same page. Some software providers’ systems may already support
XCRI-CAP. UCAS and other aggregators may already have an awareness of what
data feeds are available. Some HEIs may have adopted XCRI-CAP and could help
others to apply and adopt in a similar fashion. Once the state of play is established,
through the initial workshop, this should be followed up by regular working sessions
between data holders, their software providers and the relevant project partners. It is
important to make sure that stewards of data standards, like Jisc, are involved at an
early stage to ensure that all stakeholders can understand the value of adopting an
existing data standard, stewards are better able to understand the needs of the
stakeholders, and for both groups to be able identify where it may need to be
augmented to meet current or future needs.
This activity should allow significant progress to be made towards the practical
aspects of how supply and demand data is shared.
Work to build strategic partnerships with organisations that collect relevant
data at a national level
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector16

This recommendation is particularly relevant to the new use cases around aggregated
data about skill needs of people on Universal Credit and those at risk of
unemployment, but could be beneficial to all of the suggested use cases.
One common barrier suggested in the workshop was the inability to access more
granular data representing a national perspective around skills and the labour market
from organisations such as the Department for Work and Pensions. However, it is
worth noting that some early conversations have been taking place between project
stakeholders and the organisations that steward these national datasets. The main
reason cited for the lack of access was the difficulty in making a clear and strong
justification for why access to this more granular data is needed, and the benefits and
positive outcomes which could be achieved by better access. Making this
recommendation a medium term priority will allow for time to build a really clear
narrative as to why these organisations should be as open as possible with the data
that they collect.
By building strategic partnerships with organisations that collect and maintain
relevant national datasets, West London Business, West London Alliance and
partners will be able to:
●
Secure access to relevant national level datasets that will provide wider
context and be useful for benchmarking against other regions
●
Suggest where new datasets that do not already exist should be collected,
for the benefit of the national labour market and education sector, for
example, information about the current skills and occupational experience of
those on Universal Credit or at risk of unemployment
●
Ensure that software providers factor in national datasets as part of their
efforts to adapt their systems to improve access to data
●
Possibly secure additional funding for use cases that align with national
priorities, or be able to draw on resource and capacity from teams within
those organisations
Building these strategic partnerships will also put West London Business, West
London Alliance and partners in a good position to create replicable solutions that
benefit other regional labour markets across the UK.
Long term recommendations (12 months or
longer)
Run small pilots addressing the priority use cases identified in the previous
phase of work demonstrating the value of improving access to education and
skills data
Once the data infrastructure has been adapted to better suit the needs of the use
cases, a logical next step would be to run practical pilots that address the priority use
cases and demonstrate the tangible value of improving access to data.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector17

For the first use case around enabling the skills system to be more responsive, this
might involve generating relevant insights for skills providers so that they can make
informed decisions about how to adapt their course offerings to better suit the needs
of employers.
For the second use case around collating data about green job profiles and
information on relevant courses from Higher Education and Further Education
providers in West London, this might involve building on the work done to create the
Skills West Londonplatform, by integrating newlyavailable data from HE and FE
providers into the system.
The approach to the pilots for the other two use cases, if prioritised, is likely to be
informed by interactions with national data holders, such as the Department for Work
and Pensions and Office for National Statistics, and will need to align with their
priorities.
Based on the outcome and learnings from the pilots, determine the need to
formalise some elements of the data ecosystem in order to support wider
scalability of use cases
Once the pilots are nearing completion, it is worth considering how the approach that
has been taken to ensure better coverage of skills provision in West London could be
made sustainable and scalable. It is important that the outcomes of this project have
a long lasting, positive impact on the labour market.
In line with the outcomes and learnings from the pilots, this could involve the
development of data standards that can support a wider variety of use cases,
creating a formal governance structure such as a data institution to steward the data
being shared and support wider engagement and collaboration between
stakeholders, or supporting other regions to adopt a similar approach to their own
use cases.
Open Data Institute 2021Mapping data ecosystems in the education sector18