



Contents
Executive summary5
1. Introducing bottom-up
data institutions5
1.1 What is data stewardship?6
1.2 What are data institutions?7
1.3 What are bottom-up data institutions?9
1.4 What are the different types of bottom-up data institutions?10
2. Government interest in bottom-up data institutions13
2.1 Providing new incentives for sharing data15
2.2 Building trust in data use17
2.3 Reducing costs and increasing competition17
2.4 Unlocking data for public causes18
2.5 Mitigating harms through participation19
3. Mechanisms for government support21
3.2 Knowledge22
3.3 Trust24
3.4 Rights26
3.5 Infrastructure29
Methodology33
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20222

About
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and
published in March 2022. Its lead authors are Sara Marcucci and Matt Davies. To
share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact the Data Institutions programme
atdatainstitutions@theodi.org
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20223

Executive summary
Bottom-up data institutions enable people to take a more active role in decisions
about data. At the Open Data Institute (ODI), we think they have the potential to
address data harms while unlocking new uses of data for public good. This report
identifies four areas that need to be improved if this is to happen.
Knowledge
The existing evidence base on bottom-up data institutions and the market
opportunity they represent is limited. This could be improved by:
●
Joining up existing government support for data institutions.
●
Commissioning research on the market for bottom-up data institutions.
●
Maintaining the UK’s rich institutional knowledge on data stewardship.
Trust
There is evidence that users are likely to be wary of unproven approaches to data
stewardship. This could be improved by:
●
Providing legal definitions of data intermediation and data altruism.
●
Introducing a register for bottom-up data institutions.
●
Supporting the development of an assurance sector for data institutions.
Rights
Bottom-up data institutions often rely on the exercise of data portability rights, but
these are limited in UK and European law. This could be improved by:
●
Enhancing rights to data portability.
●
Providing a right to data reciprocity for bottom-up data institutions.
●
Loosening data processing restrictions for certified organisations.
Infrastructure
The technologies and infrastructure needed aren’t always available to facilitate
participatory data stewardship. This could be improved by:
●
Supporting the development of shared technological infrastructure.
●
Experimenting with data institutions as providers.
●
Mandating interoperability and the development of open standards.
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20224

1. Introducing
bottom-up
data institutions
1.1 What is data stewardship?
At the ODI, we want those who collect, maintain and share data to act in ways that
lead to the best economic and social outcomes for everyone. Our Theory of Change
contrasts this positive data future against two negative alternatives:
1
●
Adata hoardingfuture where organisations restrictaccess to data, using
inappropriate business or funding models for data that limit the value that we,
as a society, get from it.
●
Adata fearingfuture where unaddressed fears arisingfrom legitimate
concerns – such as who has access to data and how it might be used –
prevent us from realising its full benefits.
The concept of data stewardship is a response to data hoarding and data fearing. It is
a ‘responsible, rights-preserving and participatory concept [which] aims to unlock the
economic and societal value of data, while upholding the rights of individuals and
communities to participate in decisions relating to its collection, management and
use’.
2
The Ada Lovelace Institute defines stewardship as a concept that aims to achieve the
responsible and accountable use of common resources.
3
Data has particular
economic characteristics that make it unlike traditional examples of common
resources such as oil and forests,
4
so new paradigmsof stewardship need to be
developed and implemented.
We define data stewardship as the process of deciding who has access to data, for
what purposes and to whose benefit, to realise the value and limit the harm that use
of data can bring.
5
We see stewarding data as thefoundational activity in the lifecycle
or value chain of data – collecting, maintaining and sharing it. How data is stewarded
5
Open Data Institute (2021),What are ‘bottom-up’data institutions and how do they empower people?
4
Bennett Institute for Public Policy (2020,The Valueof Data - Summary report); Towards Data Science
(2019),   Data is not the new oil: towards data science
3
Building on Elinor Ostrom’s work on the different principles for governing the commons (Ostrom, E [2015],
Governing the Commons. Cambridge University Press). Ada Lovelace Institute (2021),Participatory data
stewardship- The Ada Lovelace Institute
2
Aapti Institute, Open Data Institute and Global Partnership for AI (2022),Enabling data sharing for social
benefit through data trusts
1
OD,I (2018),Our theory of change – The ODI
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20225

ultimately affects what types of products, services and insights it can be used to
create, what decisions it can inform and which activities it can support.
1.2 What are data institutions?
Data institutions are organisations that steward data on behalf of others, often
towards public, educational or charitable aims.
Data institutions steward data in different ways, including:
●
Protecting sensitive data and granting access under restricted
conditions.UK Biobank, for example, was set up in2006 to steward
genetic data and samples from around half a million people, and continues to
support their use for vital health research.
●
Combining or linking data from multiple sources, andproviding insights
and other services back to those that have contributed data.   In the maritime
sector,HiLotakes data generated by around 3,500ships globally to generate
vital risk and safety analyses related to lifeboat accidents, engine room fires
and other incidents.
●
Creating open datasets that anyone can access, use and shareto
further a particular cause.  OpenCorporates,OpenApparel Registryand
360Givingcollate and make accessible open data aboutcompanies,
factories and grant-making, respectively.
●
Acting as a gatekeeper for data held by other organisations,ADR UK
ensures important administrative data held by the UK Government can be
accessed safely and securely, and in the US,SocialScience Oneplays a
similar role to make Facebook data available for new research.
●
Developing and maintaining identifiers, standards and other
infrastructurefor a sector or field, such as by registeringidentifiers or
publishing open standards.Open Banking Limitedwasestablished in the UK
in 2016 to develop standards and guidelines to drive competition and
innovation in the retail banking sector.
●
Enabling people to take a more active role in stewarding data about
themselves and their communities.Open Humansenablespeople to
explore, analyse and share data about their health, and make it available for
citizen science projects.
Although the term is new, data institutions have existed in the private, public and third
sectors for as long as hundreds of years. Public organisations like national mapping
agencies, statistics agencies and archives are perhaps the oldest data institutions,
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20226

while civil society organisations, trade unions and other organisations are increasingly
taking on new data duties.
6
This report focuses on this last role: enabling people to take a more active role in
stewarding data.
Box 1: Data institutions, data intermediaries and other terms
The ODI definesdata institutionsas:
“organisations whose purpose involves stewarding data on behalf of
others, often towards public, educational or charitable aims.”
We take ‘institution’ to mean an organisation, establishment, foundation or
society, especially those that are public, educational or charitable.
The term might also be used in other contexts to mean different things.
For example:
●
To describe organisations that are essential components of the data
ecosystem but tend not to actively steward data themselves, such as
advocacy organisations, funders, auditors and so on. We think of
these as simply ‘institutions’.
●
To convey the need for a richer institutional environment around data to
ensure it works for everyone, which, as well as organisations, would
include laws, codes of conduct, norms and informal behaviours. Using
this wider lens, data protection or data portability can be seen as
institutions related to data.
Other organisations use different terms to describe similar or related concepts.
For example:
●
The UK government used the term ‘data intermediaries’in its
National Data Strategy and reports from the Centre for Data Ethics
and Innovation (CDEI).
●
The European Commission uses the terms ‘data spaces’,‘data
sharing services’ and ‘data altruism organisations’.
●
GovLab uses the term ‘data collaboratives’, to describeinitiatives
that enable data to flow from the private to public sector.
●
The Oxford Martin School is focused on ‘institutionaland legal
constructs’ that ‘could allow data to be shared inmore flexible and
innovative ways, respecting individual autonomy while generating
wider societal benefits’.
These terms are roughly the same. This report uses ‘data institutions’
throughout, but our findings will be relevant to organisations and practitioners
that use other terms.
6
Open Data Institute (2021),What are data institutionsand why are they important?
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20227

1.3 What are bottom-up data institutions?
In recent years, data institutions have emerged to empower individuals and
communities to take a more active role in the stewardship of data about them or that
they have a vested interest in. At the ODI, we refer to these asbottom-up data
institutions. These data institutions use participatorymethods to enable individuals
and communities – usually those that have generated the data or that the data is
about – to exercise greater control over the collection, maintenance and sharing of
data.
One can observe bottom-up data institutions in the wild that enable groups to
generate or repurpose data about them, and exert collective control over it for a
common purpose. For example:
●
Variant Bioworks with historically marginalised populations,where
communities are engaged prior to the beginning of research projects, and
the data is collected and used within a framework that takes into account
community concerns.
●
Driver’s Seatis an independent, driver-owned cooperativewhere members’
data is used to derive insights that help them optimise their performance.
●
Open Humansempowers individuals and communities toexplore and share
their personal data for the purposes of education, health and research.
●
MIDATAenables users to contribute to medical researchand clinical studies
by granting selective access to their personal data.
●
Gyeonggi Data Dividendensures that any financialprofits generated by
selling access to data about transactions using the local currency are
returned to citizens in the form of a dividend.
In addition to the organisations themselves, an ecosystem of research and practice
has emerged around the concept of bottom-up data stewardship. For example:
●
TheMyDataGlobal community, which aims ‘to empowerindividuals by
improving their right to self-determination regarding their personal data’.
7
●
TheMozilla Data Futures Lab, which was launched in2021 to support
experimentation around ‘new approaches to data stewardship that give
greater control and agency to people’.
8
●
TheAda Lovelace Institute, which advocates for ‘participatorydata
stewardship’, where people whose data is used or about which data
decisions are taken are meaningfully involved.
9
9
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org
8
https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/data-futures-lab/
7
https://mydata.org
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20228

●
TheAapti Institute’s work at the Data Economy Lab, which aims to empower
individuals and communities to play a bigger part in data governance, and it
has documented numerous examples of this in practice.
10
●
Connected by Data, which is a research and advocacy organisation aiming
to put community at the centre of data narratives, practices and policies.
11
At the ODI, ourdata institutions programmeis designedto bring about new data
institutions and improve the practices of existing ones, including bottom-up data
institutions.
12
1.4 What are the different types of bottom-up
data institutions?
There are many different forms of bottom-up data institution, and lenses to use to see
them through.
Our use of the term ‘bottom-up’ refers to the existence of processes that involve
people in decision-making (and less an indication of how the institutions came into
being). We observe three main approaches taken by bottom-up data institutions to
enable this participation in practice:
●
individualdecision-making; people making decisionsindividually about the
data about them
●
collectivedecision-making; people making decisionsas part of a larger
group
●
delegateddecision-making; people delegating decision-makingauthority to
another party.
13
Examples of bottom-up data institutions and the nature of involvement they support
can be seen in Figure 1.
13
Open Data Institute (2021),What are ‘bottom-up’data institutions and how do they empower people?
12
https://theodi.org/project/rd-data-institutions/
11
https://connectedbydata.org
10
https://www.aapti.in
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 20229

Figure 1: Examples of bottom-up data institutions
Bottom-up data institutions also differ in the nature of the decisions they involve
people in. Some enable people to take part in governing access to data (for example,
making decisions about whether to provide access to data to a particular project or
group of researchers) or governing the data institution itself (for example, making
decisions around the goals and principles of the organisation, plans for future
investment, and distribution of profits).
A detailed exploration of the different models for participation in data stewardship has
been carried out by the Ada Lovelace Institute.
14
Figure 2: Framework for participation in data stewardship, reproduced from Ada Lovelace
Institute (2021),Participatory data stewardship.
14
Ada Lovelace Institute (2021),Participatory datastewardship
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202210

Based on Sherry Arnstein’s ‘ladder of citizen participation’,
15
the framework produced
by Ada (in Figure 2, above) sets out the possible outcomes of informing, consulting,
involving, collaborating and empowering people, whereby people go from being
recipients of information about the data to be stewarded, to being active, empowered
actors with agency and the power to influence how that data is to be stewarded.
15
Arnstein, S (1969),A Ladder of Citizen Participation.Journal of the American Institute of Planners, 35(4),
pp.216-224
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202211

2. Government interest in
bottom-up data institutions
Over the past decade, how data is stewarded has become a significant issue for
policymakers. Scandals such as Cambridge Analytica’s use of data from Facebook
users in political advertising have raised awareness of the impact that irresponsible
data stewardship can have on individuals and society.
From an economic perspective, access to data plays a major role in developing and
delivering products and services: the five largest private companies in the world are
technology companies that offer services predicated on the collection, use and
sharing of data.
16
By supporting better decision-making,data – and technologies
which use data such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) – can contribute to the creation of
value across public, private and third sectors, and in industries from health to
transport.
17
There are a number of market failures associated with data availability,
18
meaning the
right data isn’t always available to create the necessary information and support
decision-making. In response, we’ve seen governments and other policymakers
begin to think about how to steer the stewardship of data towards their goals,
priorities and values.
In the UK, where the government has set out an ambition to become a ‘global
science and technology superpower’,
19
the InnovationStrategy
20
and AI Strategy
21
both highlight the role of data in the development of new technologies, products and
services. Mission 1 of the government’s National Data Strategy – ‘Unlocking the value
of data across the economy’ – sets out measures that aim to boost data availability
across sectors.
22
Research carried out in 2021 for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
(DCMS) by Frontier Economics identified six barriers to optimal data sharing:
23
●
Lack of incentive to share data:data providers maynot be sufficiently
incentivised to share or grant access to their data - for example, sharing may
incur costs that they are unable to recoup from the beneficiaries of expanded
access.
23
Gov.uk (2021),Increasing access to data held acrossthe economy
22
Gov.uk (2021),National Data Strategy Mission 1 PolicyFramework: Unlocking the value of data across
the economy
21
Gov.uk (2021),National AI Strategy
20
Gov.uk (2021),UK Innovation Strategy: leading thefuture by creating it
19
Gov.uk (2021),"We're restoring Britain's place asa scientific superpower"
18
Open Data Institute (2019),The Value of Data
17
Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Our theory of change’
16
PWC (2021), ‘Global Top 100 public companies by marketcapitalisation
’
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202212

●
Lack of knowledge:data providers may lack enough knowledge of the
potential uses of their data, while data users lack enough knowledge of what
data could be made available. Both parties may have limited understanding
of how data can be shared even where a potential use has been identified.
●
Commercial, reputational and ethical risks:the perceivedor actual risk
of losing competitive advantage, of suffering reputational damage from data
uses that may breach others’ trust, or from data sharing exposing
controversial business practices, may deter providers from sharing data.
●
Regulatory and legal risks:the perceived or actual risk of breaching data
protection, intellectual property rights or regulatory requirements may be a
deterrent to sharing.
●
Costs of data access/sharing:costs may be prohibitivebecause of a lack
of coordination, common foundations, infrastructure and technologies that
are needed for data sharing to be cost effective.
●
Missed opportunities to use data in the public interest:cases where
sharing data may be particularly likely to lead to economic and social gains
beyond the benefits that accrue to the organisations providing and obtaining
access to data.
Data institutions can help overcome some of the market failures associated with data
availability. The UK government’s Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation has argued
that data intermediaries can provide partial or complete solutions to each of these
barriers,
24
and has set out measures to ‘support thedevelopment of a thriving [data]
intermediary ecosystem’.
25
Recently published ODI research demonstrates the ways in which different types of
data institutions create value within their ecosystems.
26
Focussing on illustrative case
studies of five UK-based data institutions, this research found that existing data
institutions are creating significant value in the form of cost savings, efficiency gains
and positive social impacts. For example, theMarineEnvironmental Data and
Information Network (MEDIN)– which promotes the sharingand reuse of marine data
– was found to produce cost savings of £1.32 million per year from making data
reusable, whileOpenActive– which develops open datastandards to publish and use
data about sport and leisure activities – was estimated to save activity providers
£267,200 a month in time saved on promotional activities.
The field of bottom-up data institutions is relatively nascent, so claims about their
impact are necessarily speculative. However, we think it is likely that bottom-up
approaches to data stewardship can:
26
Open Data Institute (2022), ‘Measuring the impactof data institutions’
25
Gov.uk (2021),National Data Strategy Mission 1 PolicyFramework: Unlocking the value of data across
the economy
24
Gov.uk (2021),Unlocking the value of data: Exploringthe role of data intermediaries
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202213

●
provide new incentives for sharing data
●
build trust in data use
●
increase competition and reduce costs
●
unlock data for public causes
●
mitigate harms associated with data use.
2.1 Providing new incentives for sharing data
Bottom-up data stewardship can create new incentives for individuals and
communities to share data.
Some bottom-up data institutions enable people to donate data foraltruistic
reasons. An example of this isOpen Humans, whichallows people to collect data
about their health, and make it available for new research and citizen science
projects. It provides opportunities for people to come together to address health
conditions they are passionate about, and has enabled high-quality, peer-reviewed
health research. The Open Humans model is intrinsically bottom-up in nature: users
collect the data, choose to pool it, and make decisions about how access should be
governed; and this leads to the creation of data sources that would not otherwise
exist.
Other examples includeZOE Covid StudyandCorona-Datenspende,data donation
apps for Covid-19 in the UK and Germany respectively. Participants donate data on
Covid symptoms, either through an app-based interface (in the case of ZOE) or
through linking their fitness wristband or smartwatch to measure values such as sleep
patterns, heart rate and number of steps (in the case of Corona-Datenspende). This
data is then transmitted to academic partners to inform research into the spread of
Covid-19 and its health impacts.
These data donation practices are increasingly termed ‘data altruism’ due to their
similarity with more traditional forms of altruism such as philanthropic donation. Data
altruism is attracting increasing interest from policymakers who want to encourage its
spread - for example, the European Commission will establish a legal register of data
altruism organisations with its forthcoming Data Governance Act.
Other data institutions depend onvolunteer contributorswho contribute to
collective stores of knowledge. Examples of this includeOpenStreetMap,iNaturalist
andSafeCast. Each of these projects allows usersto collaborate on the creation and
governance of a comprehensive store of data which is made publicly available:
●
OpenStreetMap is a free, editable and user-created geographic database of
the world, which has grown to become one of the few viable alternatives to
Google Maps.
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202214

●
iNaturalist allows users to share observations of biodiversity across the globe,
with 66 million observations of plants, animals, fungi, and other organisms
currently listed.
●
Safecast stewards the world’s largest open dataset of background radiation
and air-quality measurements, contributed by users gathering data from
physical sensors.
Unlike Open Humans, the data contributed to these projects is not personal data -
what they have in common is the use of participation to create valuable new data
sources.
Organisations like Swash, which describes itself as a ‘data union’, take the form of a
browser extension installed by users, who can then consent for their browsing data to
be automatically captured, pooled and sold on their behalf. Unlike the examples
above, Swash is not intended to facilitate altruistic practices or civic engagement, but
seeks to generatefinancial returnfor its users.
At the ODI, we’re sceptical about financial returns as an incentive for bottom-up data
stewardship for different reasons. On a practical level, data is hard to value: its value
largely depends on how it is used and in what context, but it is difficult to predict how
it might be used by others or in the future.
27
Moreover,most of the value from data
arises when it is aggregated or combined with other datasets - this means that unless
such institutions can achieve significant scale, the returns to individuals are likely to be
minimal.
The use of financial incentives as a means of encouraging bottom-up data
stewardship has also been challenged on political and ethical grounds.
28
Critics of
these models argue that incentivising people to participate by compensating them for
data could lead to those with fewer resources being more likely to be subjected to
exploitative data gathering practices.
29
The eventualresult of this could be that
privacy and control become luxuries, creating a tiered and unequal data economy.
30
Lastly, some bottom-up data institutions enable people to contribute datain
exchange for a service. For example, Open Humans alsoprovides users with
access to tools to enable them to generate their own insights into their health.
In recent work with the Global Partnership for AI, the Aapti Institute and the Data
Trusts Initiative
31
, we have produced a design fora ‘London Cycling Data Trust’. In
return for sharing data about their cycling journeys around the city, users would get
access to improved route planning, statistics and insights about their journeys, and
an opportunity to directly feed into the development of London's cycling infrastructure
through assessments on the quality of different routes.
31
The Open Data Institute and Aapti Institute (2022),Enabling Data Sharing for Social Benefit ThroughData
Trusts: Data Trusts in Climate.
30
World Economic Forum (2017),What If: Privacy becomesa luxury good?
29
Electronic Frontier Foundation (2020),Why GettingPaid for Your Data Is a Bad Deal
28
Centre for International Governance Innovation (2019),Should Tech Firms Pay People for Their Data?
27
Open Data Institute (2020),The Value of Data
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202215

2.2 Building trust in data use
Bottom-up data stewardship can help to mitigate the risks associated with some
types of data use, and thereby increase trust in the data ecosystem.
Research carried out for the ODI by Frontier Economics has shown thattrust in data
ecosystems is a key determinant of data sharing:
32
greater trust – both in
individual institutions, and in the data ecosystem as a whole – results in higher levels
of data sharing, and increased data availability.
There is evidence to suggest thatempowerment andcontrol in data systems
can help to build trust. Research carried out by theODI in conjunction with the
RSA found support for more granular control over how data about individuals is
collected, shared and used,
33
and surveys carried outby the Centre for Data Ethics
and Innovation (CDEI)
34
and the University of Sheffield
35
have also indicated demand
for greater individual control over how personal data is managed.
In the course of this research, we carried out interviews with policymakers and
bottom-up data institutions (seeMethodology) andboth indicated thatparticipatory
approaches could help to meet this demand for greater control, particularly in
the case of sensitive data. Similar arguments have been made by the Ada Lovelace
Institute, which has argued that participatory data stewardship could increase the
legitimacy of – and therefore public trust in – the use of data,
36
and by the Information
Technology Federation of Japan, which has advocated the use of ‘personal
information banks’, a type of bottom-up data institution, as a means of supporting
trust in the data ecosystem.
37
2.3 Reducing costs and increasing competition
Another important policy goal to which bottom-up data institutions can contribute is
reducing the cost of data access and sharing by increasing competition in the digital
economy.
TheFurman Review, ‘Unlocking digital competition’,found thata lack of
competition in digital markets leads to a number of harms,
38
including reduced
innovation in services, reduced consumer choice, and higher prices for businesses
using platforms – which are then passed on to consumers. The review notes that this
lack of effective competition is amplified by ‘network-based and data-driven platform
38
Gov.uk (2019),Unlocking digital competition: Reportof the Digital Competition Expert Panel2019)
37
Nikkei Asia (2019),Japan's 'information banks' tolet users cash in on personal data
36
Ada Lovelace Institute (2021),Participatory datastewardship
35
Hartman, T, Kennedy, H, Steedman, R, Jones, R (2020)Public perceptions of good data management:
Findings from a UK-based survey
34
Gov.uk (2020),Online targeting: Final report andrecommendations
33
Open Data Institute (2019),Data About Us: 'the people'know and care more than they are given
credit for
32
Frontier Economics for the Open Data Institute (2021),The economic impact of trust in data ecosystems
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202216

business models [that] tend to tip markets towards a single winner’, and that data
openness must be a key tool for the newDigital MarketsUnitfor promoting
competition.
39
ODI research
40
has identified similar patterns in theartificial intelligence (AI) sector.
Organisations with access to large silos of high-quality data are better able to train
high-performing AI systems with it; these high-performing AI systems are more likely
to be more widely adopted; and the wide usage of these high-performing AI systems
generates more data for the data silos, in a feedback loop that tends towards
monopoly.
Bottom-up data institutions can help to tackle this problem bycreating new,
alternative stores of data in specific sectors. This,in turn, creates greater
competition in data providers, reduces the competitive advantage enjoyed by
incumbents and creates greater choice for consumers.
41
One example of this is
OpenStreetMap, which has emerged as a viable competitor in a concentrated market
dominated by top-down mapping projects such as Google and Apple Maps.
2.4 Unlocking data for public causes
Bottom-up data institutions canunlock data for publiccauses,including the UK
government’s net zero carbon ambitions and United Nations’ sustainable
development goals.
42
Recent ODI research has set out the potential for data trusts – themselves a form of
bottom-up data institution – to helptackle the climatecrisis, providing practitioners
and policymakers with usable models.
43
Other typesof bottom-up data institutions
are already providing new sources of data that could help to support climate change
mitigation efforts. For example:
●
Globe at Nightis an international citizen sciencecampaign to raise public
awareness of the impact of light pollution by inviting citizen-scientists to
measure and share their observations of the brightness of the night sky.
●
Sensor.Communityis a network of individuals withDIY air quality sensors.
The community pools data about air quality from all over the world to create
an open environmental dataset.
●
TheEnergy Data Co-opis being developed by Open DataManchester and
Carbon Co-op, where people can pool and share data to improve the
efficiency of their homes by changing how energy is used.
43
GPAI (2022),Enabling data sharing for social benefitthrough data trusts
42
United Nations (no date),The 17 goals
41
Autonomy (2020),Platforming Equality: policy challengesfor the digital economy
40
Open Data Institute (2018),The role of data in AIbusiness models
39
Ibid
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202217

Other examples can be found inthe field of labour rights, where an increasing
number of tools and initiatives rely upon data about workers being made widely
available, accessible, usable or open:
44
●
Worker Info Exchangesupports trade unions and grassrootsworker
organisations to collect data gathered on them by employers (through
subject access and data portability requests), aggregate this data and
analyse it in support of collective bargaining.
●
Driver’s Seatallows gig economy drivers to combinetheir driving data with
data from other drivers to gain insights about their gig work. Driver’s Seat
then sells this data to municipal agencies on behalf of drivers and distributes
the profits back to members.
●
WeClock’s worker collectives allow workers to collect,pool and analyse data
on their own activities, supporting collective bargaining and allowing
instances of employer malpractice to be recorded and investigated.
Some of the above initiatives, as well as efforts by trade unions to steward member
data in creative ways were highlighted in a recent roundtable run by the ODI as part
of itsExperimentalism and the Fourth Industrial Revolutionproject.
45
2.5 Mitigating harms through participation
Finally, participation in data stewardship can help to mitigate harms associated with
data use.
Data is the result of a process of collection, standardisation and categorisation of
social behaviour. It is not necessarily neutral or representative of an objective version
of reality; it is instead situated knowledge, which results from a particular experience
of the world. Many commentators have noted how data materialises human prejudice
and reflects the knowledge, bias, and experience of those who collect, manage and
analyse it.
46
As a consequence, technologies which use data tend to reflect the existing social
structures and power relations they are developed in. This, in turn, risks further
exacerbating and intensifying the exclusion of already marginalised communities and
social groups.
47
For example, a study from the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology
47
Broussard, M (2018), Automated unintelligence: How computers misunderstand the world. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press;Taylor, L (2017), What is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms
globally.Big Data & Society, 4(2), pp.1-14; Benjamin,R (2019), Race after technology: The new Jim Crow.
Durham: Duke University Press.
46
O' Neil, C. (2016), Weapons of math destruction. How big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. New York: Penguin Random House; Benjamin, R (2019), Race after technology: The new Jim
Crow. Durham: Duke University Press; Eubanks, V (2018), Automating inequality. New York: St. Martin’s
Press; Noble, S (2018), Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. New York: New
York University.
45
Open Data Institute (2021),Le Guin and data subversions
44
Open Data Institute (2021),Data institutions forlabour rights and supply chains
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202218

(MIT) has shown that voice and face recognition systems do not recognise the voices
and faces of those who are not considered or participants in the programming of
these models. In particular, black women are recognised far less often than both
white men and women.
Empowering people who will be directly affected by the use of data to participate in
the data stewardship process can help to mitigate some of these harms. Bottom-up
approaches can help to ensure that the design of data institutions takes into account
as many experiences and viewpoints as possible, improving their representativeness.
This can enable a higher degree of confidence that the systems used to steward data
are fair and just.
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202219

3. Mechanisms for
government support
The UK’s National Data Strategy, published in 2020, pledged to ‘create an
environment that supports existing data institutions in the public, private and third
sectors’. Support for data institutions falls under Mission 1 of the National Data
Strategy, ‘Unlocking the value of data across the economy’.
‘Data: a new direction’, the 2021 DCMS consultation on proposed changes to the
UK’s data protection regime, referenced data intermediaries, asking whether, and
how, the government should have a role in enabling the activity of responsible data
intermediaries. The ODI’s response highlighted that data institutions can help to
improve data availability across the economy, and argued that the government needs
both to actively support them and manage associated risks.
48
At a European Union (EU) level, the European Strategy for Data
49
and accompanying
legislation such as the Data Governance Act
50
and DataAct
51
aim to stimulate
economic growth through industrial data spaces and promote a human-centric data
economy via new data altruism organisations.
Over the course of our research for this report, we identified four areas that need to
improve if bottom-up data institutions are to further grow:
●
Knowledge– The existing evidence base on bottom-updata institutions
and the size of the potential market opportunity they represent is limited.
●
Trust– Bottom-up data institutions need to be trustedby the individuals and
communities that use them, but there is some evidence that users are likely
to be wary of new or unproven approaches to data stewardship.
●
Rights– Bottom-up data institutions often rely onthe contribution of user
data through the exercise of data portability rights, but these are limited in UK
and European law.
●
Infrastructure– The technological infrastructuresrequired for bottom-up
data stewardship aren’t always available.
While preparing this report, we have drawn inspiration from policies that have been
implemented and proposed in the UK, EU and elsewhere in the world. The
mechanisms suggested below are intended to be considered in the context of the UK
51
European Parliament (no date),Data Act
50
European Parliament (no date),Data Governance Act
49
European Commission (no date),Strategy for Data
48
Open Data Institute (2021),The ODI responds to theUK government's consultation on proposed reforms
to data protection
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202220

– although we hope they will be useful to policymakers in other countries – and any
references to ‘government’ should be understood to refer to the UK government,
except where otherwise indicated.
3.2 Knowledge
One of the factors preventing the further emergence and growth of bottom-up data
institutions is the limited evidence base that currently exists on their effectiveness and
potential.
Bottom-up data institutions are a new type of organisation, and few currently exist at
scale. While there is some evidence (explored in Chapter 2) that participatory approaches
to data stewardship can unlock new stores of data and enhance trust in existing
institutions, there is a need to better define these opportunities and assess their potential
to grow. Doing so will help to inform and align the activities of different actors operating in
this ecosystem, including bottom-up data institutions themselves, government, and
potential funders or investors.
There are a number of actions that could help to improve knowledge of bottom-up
data institutions and their potential:
Join up and rationalise existing government support
The government needs to work across departments, arm’s-length bodies, regulators
and relevant third and private sector actors to join up and rationalise the provision of
support for data institutions.
Currently, numerous departments and arm’s-length bodies – including the DCMS, the
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), the Department of
Health and Social Care, and UK Research and Innovation – provide direct or indirect
support for data institutions. Rationalising and joining up government support for data
institutions – perhaps by designating a central team with an enhanced remit to
coordinate support for data institutions across government – could help to:
●
ensure value for money on government investments in this area
●
improve the government’s own knowledge-gathering and horizon-scanning
capabilities by enabling more detailed ongoing monitoring of the ecosystem
and its own role as a funder
●
simplify the landscape for data institutions, including bottom-up data
institutions, currently receiving support, and those seeking to receive it in
future.
Getting this right and improving the government's understanding of its own data
investments would support Mission 3 of the National Data Strategy: ‘Transforming
government’s use of data to drive efficiency and improve public services’. This is a
public good in itself: the government has a duty to get its own use of data right, to
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202221

improve how it makes policies, delivers services and otherwise effectively and
efficiently runs its operations.
But it is also essential to, and cannot be separated from, achieving other missions of
the National Data Strategy, including Mission 1, ‘Unlocking the value of data across
the economy’. The government can influence what others do through setting
expectations and sending signals.
52
By understandingits own data needs, and
identifying areas where participatory data stewardship could help to meet these
needs, it can help to establish this as best practice across the economy.
Commission research and trials to assess the potential
market for bottom-up data institutions across sectors
The government can continue to commission and support research and trials that will
help improve understanding of the potential market opportunity for bottom-up data
institutions.
This opportunity will no doubt vary depending on the specific use case or sector
under consideration: some sectors may have data needs that could be met by new
bottom-up data-gathering approaches, while others will not. Equally, in some cases
existing silos of data might be improved by more participatory approaches to
stewardship, while in other cases these approaches will not be appropriate.
In addition to this, the relative merits of different business models for bottom-up data
institutions need investigation. As discussed in Chapter 1, bottom-up data institutions
can rely on a variety of different incentives – including data altruism, access to
services and financial reward – to drive user interest and engagement, but little
research has been done on the effectiveness of different approaches.
By funding horizon-scanning research into new bottom-up approaches, the
government will be able to provide private and third sector actors with the knowledge
they need to build and engage with these new institutions.
Maintain the UK’s rich institutional landscape and knowledge
on bottom-up data stewardship
The government can continue to provide support for the UK’s rich institutional
landscape and knowledge on bottom-up data stewardship.
In recent years, the UK government has funded pioneering research into potential
models for data intermediation, including DCMS funding for the ODI’s own work on
data institutions, Office for AI research into data trusts,
53
and in-house CDEI work on
data intermediaries.
These organisations, including the ODI, can drive the research agenda, as well as
provide benefits to UK-based data institutions in other ways, such as through
53
Open Data Institute (2019),Data trusts: lessonsfrom three pilots
52
Open Data Institute (2021),Mapping data in the UKgovernment
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202222

mentoring, advocacy and the provision of practical guidance. Maintaining the UK’s
hard-won thought leadership and practical knowledge in this area, will contribute to
the information-gathering goals set out above and ensure that guidance is available to
those bottom-up data institutions that need it.
3.3 Trust
Research carried out for the ODI by Frontier Economics has shown that trust in data
ecosystems is a key determinant of data sharing.
54
There is some evidence –
discussed in the previous chapter – that data institutions can enhance trust in data
use, and that the empowerment and control provided by bottom-up institutions might
be particularly conducive to this goal.
However, data institutions themselves require trust from the individuals and
communities that use them. People need to be able to trust that they can safely share
data with or through data institutions; data users need to know that they can reliably
use data from data institutions; and people, organisations and communities affected
by data institutions need to trust that they are having a positive impact.
For bottom-up data institutions, trust is a particularly acute issue: first, their explicit
reliance on user willingness to engage means that they are more vulnerable to
fluctuations in public trust than others data institutions; and second, users are likely to
be wary of new approaches to data stewardship without first seeing proof of their
effectiveness and independence.
There are a number of actions that could help to improve trust in bottom-up data
institutions:
Provide a legal definition for (bottom-up) data institutions
The government can provide legal definitions for data institutions and specific
data-gathering practices such as data altruism.
This could help bottom-up data institutions work towards a particular legal standard,
and enhance public trust by providing clarity on what they can expect data
institutions to do with data about them or in which they have a vested interest. It
wouldn’t necessarily require new primary legislation – it could be done through
secondary legislation, or through guidance from the government or a regulator
through the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO).
The European Commission’s Data Governance Act seeks to do this by defining data
intermediaries as organisations which provide ‘data sharing services’ and requiring
that they comply with strict rules on how they handle data. For example, the act
requires data intermediaries to ‘act only as intermediaries in the transactions’ and not
use the data exchanged for any other purpose. It expects structural safeguards to be
54
Frontier Economics for the Open Data Institute (2021),The economic impact of trust in data ecosystems
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202223

put in place to ensure this, with data sharing services provided through a legal entity
separate from that which carries out any of the organisation’s other activities. By
clearly defining what activities data intermediaries can legally carry out, the
Commission hopes that public trust in them will be strengthened, allowing the sector
to grow.
Introduce a register for bottom-up data institutions
Another option would be to introduce a register for bottom-up data institutions.
The European Commission’s Data Governance Act will require that individual member
states, and the Commission itself, establish a ‘register of recognised data altruistic
organisations’. Once the act is passed, only controllers listed in this register will be
able to call themselves a ‘data altruism organisation recognised in the Union’. To
register as a data altruism organisation, a data controller will need to meet the
following criteria:
●
be a legal entity constituted to meet objectives of general interest
●
operate on a not-for-profit basis and be independent from any entity that
operates on a for-profit basis
●
performs the activities related to data altruism through a legally independent
structure, separate from other activities it has undertaken.
By regulating which organisations can and cannot describe themselves as data
altruism organisations, a register could provide greater clarity about the purpose of
the data institutions with which they are sharing data. This would reduce instances of
incorrect or fraudulent claims to data altruism, and help to build trust in data altruism
as a practice. It could also aid the development of such organisations, supporting
growth and innovation.
In the UK context, there are a number of different routes – both legislative and
non-legislative – by which a register could be created. Its maintenance could be taken
on by an existing body such as the ICO, Ofcom or the CMA.
Support the development of an assurance sector for
bottom-up data institutions
Government can support the development of a mature assurance sector for
bottom-up data institutions, including audit and certification services.
Audits and certifications are assessments that can be conducted internally by a data
institution to improve its own trustworthy operation, or externally by a third party.
Previous ODI research has explored the role of these mechanisms in providing
assurance of data trusts
55
and of data institutionsmore broadly.
56
56
Open Data Institute (2020),Designing trustworthydata institutions
55
Open Data Institute (2019),Data trusts: will certificationwork?
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202224

A study carried out in 2021 by Frontier Economics on behalf of the ODI identified a
nascent but buoyant market of firms and services focused on trust in data, and
revealed a potentially significant market opportunity for these organisations in the
coming years.
57
An example of this is the Japanese government, which has worked with the
Information Technology Federation of Japan to create guidelines and a certification
scheme for ‘personal information banks’, a form of bottom-up data institution. The
first of these organisations was announced in 2019, and a number of established
companies now offer this service.
58
The operation ofpersonal information banks is
dependent on a robust certification system, which ensures that businesses operating
an information bank meet certain standards of reliability and trustworthiness. The
certification scheme is government-backed, but managed by the Information
Technology Federation of Japan – illustrating how governments can act as stewards
for private sector-led schemes, building trust in data sharing.
However, the wide variety of different models that exist for bottom-up data institutions
– as discussed in Chapter 1 – may act as a barrier to the rapid establishment of
certification schemes. Researchers from Harvard University exploring the possibility of
a certification scheme for platform cooperatives found ‘an environment that was too
new and diverse for a formal certification process or shared standards [in need of]
greater collaboration among cooperatives on best practices’.
59
3.4 Rights
A third challenge to the further emergence and growth of bottom-up data institutions
is the relative weakness of data portability rights in the UK and the EU. The ODI has
previously defined data portability as:
‘the ability to share data between people, groups and organisations. A
company, for example, might ‘port’ data – which could involve the transfer of
data, or the provision of access to it – to a third party in order to deliver a
particular service.’
The GDPR introduced a right to data portability, allowing users to demand the
transfer of their data in a machine-readable format. This is the primary legal route
which many existing bottom-up data institutions use to receive data. An example of
this is WorkerInfoExchange, which makes use of data portability requests from
individual users to receive data initially collected by gig economy platforms, such as
Deliveroo and Uber.
59
Berkman Klein Centre (2022),What we learned fromour research sprint on cooperative data governance
58
Nikkei Asia (2019),Japan's 'information banks' tolet users cash in on personal data
57
Open Data Institute (2021),New research for ODIreveals a nascent but buoyant market of firms and
services focused on trust in data
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202225

As it currently stands, however, the data portability right isn’t suited to supporting
bottom-up data stewardship. Requests are often frustrated or denied outright on data
protection grounds, and the right is subject to further limits that make its exercise
cumbersome:
●
it only supports one-off requests rather than continuous access
●
data holders can wait up to a month to fulfil them, and often longer
●
it is only a right for individuals rather than all account holders (which may be
organisations or households).
Strengthening the right to data portability, and introducing new related rights, could
help improve access to data for bottom-up data institutions and allow them to grow.
There are a number of actions that could achieve this:
Enhance rights to data portability
Government can enhance rights to data portability, empowering individuals to share
and transfer data concerning them to new types of organisations. Revisions to
regulation could include:
●
supporting continuous access to data through application programming
interfaces (APIs), rather than one-off requests
●
requiring data holders to fulfil requests within a month
●
requiring data holders to cater for data portability requests from
organisations, households and groups (for example shared accounts).
Further changes to data portability regulation should be considered on a
sector-by-sector basis. It may be that this functionality develops naturally, without
regulation: providing access to data is a strategy that organisations that hold data
adopt if they think they can become the centre of an app ecosystem, as it makes
their service more useful for consumers. It may be that regulatory intervention is only
needed in sectors where no access is provided, or where companies form a club and
only support data portability between each other.
The BEIS Smart Data agenda is an example of how greater data portability can be
achieved in specific sectors without recourse to primary legislation, although new
government powers may be needed to mandate participation in Smart Data
initiatives.
60
The government should consider how SmartData initiatives can be
designed to facilitate the growth of bottom-up data institutions in sectors where
greater user, consumer or citizen participation would be valuable.
60
GOV.UK (2019),Smart data: putting consumers in controlof their data and enabling innovation
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202226

Government and regulators should also be aware of the potential adverse
consequences of enhanced data portability rights. While facilitating the flow of
personal data between organisations could be hugely beneficial to bottom-up data
institutions, in some circumstances having some friction around moving personal data
to new services will be a good thing and prevent abuses.
61
Provide a right to data reciprocity
A related reform could include the introduction of a right to data reciprocity, as
advocated in a report by employment rights lawyers Robin Allen QC and Dee Masters
for the Trades Union Congress.
62
At present, data collection in most sectors is one-sided: employees, workers and
consumers provide data, and employers or vendors use it, providing only generalised
insights to data subjects in return. It is this asymmetry that motivates the use of data
portability requests by bottom-up data institutions.
Allen and Masters argue that to redress this imbalance ‘there should be a requirement
that an employer can obtain consent to use data only if a reciprocal right is given to
the worker’.
63
If extended to other groups such asconsumers, such a reform could
stimulate further growth of bottom-up data stewardship by allowing organisations to
circumvent the friction created by limited data portability rights.
It could also help to enable consumer organisations, cooperatives, trade unions and
membership organisations to take on data stewardship responsibilities on behalf of
their memberships and become bottom-up data institutions themselves.
Loosen data processing regulations under GDPR for certified
bottom-up data institutions
In addition to data portability, the GDPR introduced further legal rights for data
subjects and requirements on data controllers, including bottom-up data institutions
and their users.
These rights and responsibilities are important safeguards: they help to support trust
in the data ecosystem. As we argued in our response to DCMS’s 2021 consultation
on data protection, weakening protections could potentially carry long-term and
indirect costs in the form of negative externalities from the increased collection and
use of sensitive personal data.
64
64
Open Data Institute (2021),The ODI responds to theUK government's consultation on proposed reforms
to data protection
63
Ibid
62
TUC (2021),Work and the AI revolution
61
Open Data Institute (2018),Data portability: therole governments should play
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202227

However, it’s also clear that harms and benefits from data policies and data practices
don’t remain static: they change over time. The growth of new, bottom-up forms of
data stewardship – and new incentives to share data, such as data altruism –
presents new opportunities for data to be used in innovative and socially beneficial
ways. In some cases, where existing legislation serves as a barrier to this, there could
be an argument for loosening or refining the obligations placed upon bottom-up data
institutions.
German non-profit group AlgorithmWatch have highlighted a number of ways in
which this could be done, including:
65
●
excluding the processing of personal data for altruistic purposes from the
scope of the GDPR by creating an altruism exemption, similar to the existing
household exemption
●
providing data controllers deemed altruistic with an advantage when
balancing interests required under Article 6 of the GDPR
●
privileging further processing for altruistic purposes, either in all
circumstances or in relation to personal data which is already publicly
available.
These ideas are worthy of further consideration, but they would likely need to be
accompanied by some of the measures discussed in the previous section on trust to
ensure that greater rights to personal data are not abused by organisations claiming
altruism on spurious grounds.
3.5 Infrastructure
The functions of a data institution – for example holding data on behalf of an
organisation or person, or combining data from different sources – require
well-functioning technical tools. This need is particularly acute for bottom-up data
institutions, which will usually require some sort of front-end software to enable user
participation. There are a number of ways in which this infrastructure could be
improved:
Support the development of shared technological
infrastructure
The government can support – through funding, piloting and testing – the
development of shared infrastructure that can be used by bottom-up data institutions.
65
AlgorithmWatch (2022),Data altruism: how the EUis screwing up a good idea
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202228

One example of this is DECODE (DEcentralised Citizen-owned Data Ecosystems), an
EU-funded project designed to develop practical solutions that would put individuals
in control of personal data. DECODE ran four pilots in Amsterdam and Barcelona to
test this technology between 2017 and 2019. DECODE provided free, open source,
interoperable tools to enable bottom-up, community-driven projects using data,
including:
●
DECODE OS, a private, anonymous, peer-to-peer network
●
DECODE app, providing anonymous authentication for digital democracy
applications
●
BarcelonaNow, allowing the creation of interactive dashboards for the
exploration, interpretation and sharing of data.
By supporting the development of freely accessible, open source tools such as this,
the government could facilitate the growth of bottom-up data institutions in different
sectors that depend on this infrastructure.
Experiment with data institutions as technology providers
The government can support the development of infrastructure for bottom-up data
institutions by experimenting and procuring services that already exist.
In 2020, the government of Flanders – the most populous sub-national unit of
Belgium – partnered with Inrupt and Solid to pilot a service called My Citizen Profile.
The aim of this was to provide every citizen with a Secure Data Store or ‘Solid Pod’ to
store data, with control over who would be able to access it and when.
Other public and quasi-public bodies, notably the NHS and the BBC in the UK, have
taken part in similar trials of Solid Pods.
66
The ODI’s Experimentalism and the Fourth Industrial Revolution project is exploring
how governments can adapt through experimentation to the unprecedented and
fast-changing circumstances created by greater data availability.
67
Participants in
project roundtables have highlighted the need to work across sectors when engaging
in public sector experimentation around data as a way of building public trust and
mitigating resource constraints.
68
By involving bottom-up data institutions in this process, government can support
them to develop and improve their services, as well as shielding itself from some of
the potential risks involved in developing bespoke digital infrastructure.
69
69
House of Commions Public Accounts Committee (2019),Government flagship digital identification
system failing its users
68
ODI (2021),Asimov's Data Revolution
67
ODI (2021),Project: Experimentalism and the FourthIndustrial Revolution
66
Financial Times (2022),NHS signs up for Tim Berners-Leepilot to reinvent web
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202229

Mandate interoperability and the development of open standards
The previous section highlighted the need for improved rights to data portability and
control to make it easier for users to engage with bottom-up data institutions. These
rights will only be executable in practice if organisations adopt common standards,
allowing data to flow between them.
Standards for data are reusable agreements that make it easier for people and
organisations to publish, access, share and use better quality data. Open standards
are standards which are “made available to the general public and are developed (or
approved) and maintained via a collaborative and consensus-driven process.”
70
70
ITU (2022),Definition of "Open Standards"
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202230

By driving the greater adoption of open standards, the government can support the
flow of data within and across sectors. One way of doing this would be to mandate
interoperability: that is, requiring organisations in a specific sector to adopt a shared
set of open standards which would enable users to freely transfer data between
different service providers.
Recent work from the Ada Lovelace Institute has highlighted the use of interoperability
mandates under existing competition law in the European Union, including rulings that
have prevented Microsoft and Google from privileging use of their own products and
services on hardware using their operating systems.
71
In the UK context, interoperability mandates are a feature of existing Smart Data
initiatives: Open Banking makes use of a mandate from the Competition and Markets
Authority (CMA) requiring current account providers to interoperate with authorised
payments providers.
72
Building on these initiatives, a new Digital Markets Unit (DMU) has now been
established within the CMA, with responsibility for ‘enabling greater personal data
mobility and systems with open standards’.
73
The governmenthas proposed that the
DMU will need the power to mandate interoperability and third party data access,
with forthcoming legislation expected to enable this.
74
Considering the impact of open
standards on bottom-up data institutions could form an important part of this work.
74
GOV.UK (2021),A new pro-competition regime for digitalmarkets
73
GOV.UK (2019),Unlocking digital competition, Reportof the Digital Competition Expert Panel
72
Open Banking (2021),Variable Recurring Paymentsrequired for Sweeping
71
Ada Lovelace Institute (2021),Making interoperabilitywork in practice: forms, business models and
safeguards
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202231

Methodology
This work set out to better understand ‘How can the UK government create an
enabling environment for bottom-up data institutions?’.
Our research questions were:
●
What are the main barriers that bottom-up data institutions encounter?
●
Why should policymakers care about bottom-up data institutions flourishing?
●
What is already being done to support bottom-up data institutions?
We undertook a mixed methods approach, consisting of desk research and
interviews with expert stakeholders.
Our desk research focused on identifying bottom-up data institutions and relevant
policies in the UK and around the world. We sampled for bottom-up data institutions
from thedata institutions register. We examined:
●
general information about the organisation – core goals or mission,
governance paradigm, and sector
●
form of data institution – the functions it fulfils or services it provides
●
revenue models, considering organisations that are both for-profit and
not-for-profit
●
main activities and projects.
For existing policies, we assessed:
●
existing governmental support for bottom-up data institutions in the UK
●
existing governmental support for bottom-up data institutions in other
countries
●
broader data priorities and goals.
We conducted 13 interviews with 17 people from bottom-up data institutions,
government bodies, and relevant experts and stakeholders.
We aimed to cover a range of bottom-up data institutions, of different maturity levels,
stewardship roles and sectors, prioritising socially oriented institutions. We asked the
organisations about their governance model, their needs, the barriers and challenges
encountered, the support received from governments and the support desired.  We
interviewed ErnieApp, Schluss, Salus.coop, OpenStreetMap and
WorkerInfoExchange .
Through our interviews with government bodies and other stakeholders, we sought to
understand the support they currently provide to bottom-up data institutions, the
barriers they encounter in doing so and the outcomes desired from that support. We
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202232

spoke to the Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy, Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, Treasury,
European Commission, the Ada Lovelace Institute, the Aapti Institute and the
International Centre of Expertise in Montréal on Artificial Intelligence.
We’re conscious of the following limitations of this work:
●
A limited number of interviews with bottom-up data institutions and
policymakers, which restricts our interview findings to a limited amount of
lived experiences, needs and perspectives.
●
A focus on emerging and successful bottom-up data institutions without
covering instances of failed bottom-up data institutions, which has not
illustrated their lessons learned or barriers that could not be overcome.
●
Sampling from the ODI’s ecosystem, which skews towards European
organisations and to views that may be similar to our own.
This study is part of our ongoing effort to increase awareness and understanding of
data institutions among policymakers, funders and others. We hope that our findings
indicate some potential routes for future policy development that the UK government
and other policymakers can draw on to create an enabling environment for data
institutions to thrive. Future work in the ODI’s data institutions programme will aim to
build on this research, further developing our understanding of the mechanisms
discussed in this report and how they might be implemented.
Bottom-up data institutions: mechanisms for governmentsupport | March 202233