

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Executive summary3 
Introduction4 
An ecosystem of trust6 
What is a data institution trusted to do?6 
Data institutions as trust intermediaries7 
The external ecosystem8 
Being trustworthy and being trusted10 
A framework for trust10 
How trust breaks down12 
Being trustworthy with data14 
A system of rules14 
Ethical design17 
Organisational design18 
Organisational governance19 
The role of technology21 
Being trusted with data23 
Mapping trust mechanisms23 
Third party trust26 
Assessing trustworthiness27 
Trusting others30 
Invest in capability to take collective decisions30 
Be fearless, be honest31 
If you want to go far, go together31 
Provide opportunities to re-evaluate following new information33 
Stakeholders’ views can change33 
Data institutions as centres of debate34 
Conclusion and next steps35 
Areas for further research35 
Suggestions for those scoping, designing and running data institutions36 
Appendix A: Methodology38 
Research questions38 
Desk research38 
Interviews38 
Appendix B: Map of trust mechanisms40 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and was 
published in April 2020. The lead authors are Rachel Wilson and Olivier Thereaux, 
with contributions from Sonia Duarte, Renate Samson, Jared Robert Keller, Jack 
Hardinges and Jeni Tennison. 
 
If you would like to send us feedback, please get in contact with us at 
research@theodi.org​. 
 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from 
the community in the comments. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  2 

 
 
Executive summary 
In spring 2019, the Open Data Institute (ODI) released pilot reports concluding that 
data trusts – new organisational structures providing independent stewardship of 
data – could be useful in increasing access to data while retaining trust. Data trusts 
are one example of a broader range of data institutions. 
 
Data institutions are organisations whose purpose involves stewarding data on behalf 
of others, often towards public, educational or charitable aims. For these institutions 
to achieve this purpose, they need to be both trustworthy and trusted. Some data 
institutions, however well intentioned, could fail to operate in an effective and 
trustworthy way, possibly causing harm. In addition, data contributors and other 
stakeholders need to assess whether they should work with a particular data 
institution or not. 
 
There are some things that a data institution ​must​ do, for example to comply with 
laws and regulations, but there are others that, while not mandated, will help a data 
institution build and maintain trust.  
 
A trust framework, combined with an understanding of the ecosystem of trust 
surrounding a typical data institution, can give a clear understanding of what is 
expected of a data institution, and what mechanisms are available to assess and to 
demonstrate its trustworthiness. 
 
Many mechanisms and tools are available for data institutions to adopt. And much 
that is needed to design a trustworthy data institution can be derived from exemplars 
in organisational design and governance elsewhere. Other mechanisms, such as 
certification programmes for data institutions, need to be developed, tested and 
integrated in the ecosystem.  
 
This exploratory research from the ODI ran in parallel to a related project on 
designing ​sustainable ​data institutions. Both projects have highlighted that trust and 
1
sustainability are deeply connected, requiring strong governance and ongoing 
community engagement. This report does not presume to have all the answers to 
what makes a ​good​ data institution, but it provides a way of thinking that will both 
guide new data institutions, and form a basis for future work in this field. 
  
1
 ​Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Sustainable data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/sustainable-data-institutions  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  3 

 
 
Introduction 
Data stewardship involves collecting, maintaining and sharing data, and, in particular, 
determining who has access to it, for what purpose and to whose benefit. 
 
How data is stewarded is important, as it affects what it can be used for and how it 
may bring benefit or cause harm. Data institutions are organisations whose purpose 
involves stewarding data on behalf of others, often towards public, educational or 
charitable aims. At the ODI, we have been exploring the role of data institutions in 
increasing access to data. 
 
Data trusts are one type of data institution. They provide independent, fiduciary 
stewardship of data. With data trusts, one party authorises another to make 
2
decisions about data on their behalf, for the benefit of a wider group of stakeholders. 
The independent person, group or entity stewarding the data takes on a fiduciary 
duty, which is considered the highest level of obligation that one party can owe to 
another. 
 
Some data institutions will follow a similar pattern, whereby an organisation, or group 
of organisations, entrusts them to share data with others. Other data institutions will 
play different roles, such as combining or linking data, and providing benchmarks and 
other insights to the organisations that have contributed to them. 
 
Setting up institutions to steward data can create benefits for organisations, people 
and communities through data being used more widely. But data contributors need 
to be able to determine whether they should share data with or through the data 
institution; data users need to know whether to use data from it; and people, 
organisations and communities affected by the data institution need to assess 
whether to support its operation or campaign against it. These judgements rest on 
the question: is this data institution trustworthy? 
 
To explore this topic, the ODI carried out desk research into trust and 
trustworthiness, and the ways existing institutions make themselves trustworthy and 
trusted. We also reviewed and built upon our earlier research on data trusts and data 
institutions. This was complemented by interviews with representatives from the 
following data institutions: 
 
●Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA): an official body which 
3
collects, analyses and publishes data about higher education in the UK. 
HESA collaborates with higher education providers, such as universities, to 
collect and curate higher education data sources. Its products are used by 
researchers and policymakers for transparency, retaining public trust and 
decision making.  
●Research Organization Registry (ROR): a community-led project working 
4
to produce a unique, open, usable and sustainable identifier for every 
research organisation in the world. 
2
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Data trusts in 2020’, ​https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-in-2020/  
3
 Higher Education Statistics Agency (n.d.), ​https://www.hesa.ac.uk/  
4
 Research Organization Registry (n.d.), ​https://ror.org/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  4 

 
 
●HiLo Maritime Risk Management: a not-for-profit joint industry initiative 
5
providing analysis of shipping data to make the industry safer. Shipping 
companies share safety-related data from vessels and HiLo runs it through a 
risk algorithm, and shares insights with the companies.  
●OpenCorporates: the world’s largest open database of information about 
6
companies. All of the data on OpenCorporates comes from primary public 
sources, and is used by individuals, journalists, non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs) and companies.  
●MusicBrainz:​ ​a project to create a collaborative database about artists, 
7
songs and albums. Any user can contribute and release the music metadata 
under open licences. 
  
This report presents the results of our initial exploratory research and provides an 
overview for those designing or running data institutions about what to consider in 
order to be trustworthy, how to build and maintain trust, and how to avoid potential 
breakdowns of trust. 
 
We start by introducing a framework that describes how trust tends to operate. Using 
this framework, we can better understand how different mechanisms for building trust 
are designed to work and what aspects of trustworthiness and trust they try to 
address. 
 
We then describe what a data institution will be expected to do to achieve its 
objectives, that is, what makes it worthy of trust. These are primarily related to 
processes, capability or legal compliance that are, in the main, directly under the 
control of the institution itself. We also describe what a data institution can do to 
demonstrate its trustworthiness to other parties, and how to close the gap between 
being ​trustworthy​ and being ​trusted​.  
 
There are various legal, procedural and technical mechanisms that can be used to 
provide assurances of trustworthiness throughout a data institution’s lifecycle. We 
describe some of these mechanisms in this report. Some of these mechanisms are 
things a data institution ​must​ do, while others are things a data institution ​should​ do. 
 
We hope this research will lead to the development of further guidance to support the 
effective adoption of trustworthy practices by new and existing data institutions, and 
to demonstrate their trustworthiness to those who want to use their services. 
 
 
 
  
5
 HiLo Maritime Risk Management (n.d.), ​https://hilomrm.com/  
6
 OpenCorporates (n.d.), ​https://opencorporates.com/  
7
 MusicBrainz (n.d.), ​https://musicbrainz.org/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  5 

 
 
An ecosystem of trust 
“Companies do not exist in isolation. To succeed in the 
long term, directors and the companies they lead need to 
build and maintain successful relationships with a wide 
range of stakeholders.” 
8
 
Trust is inherently about relationships and communication between people and 
organisations. There are many actors interacting with a data institution who need to 
know whether it is trustworthy. A data institution needs to demonstrate its 
trustworthiness to these different people and organisations, and, in turn, needs to 
trust those people and organisations. 
 
The role of a data institution will differ depending on its mission; the needs of the 
ecosystem and community; the number of data contributors and users; the countries 
it operates in; and the sensitivity of the data being managed. 
9
 
Some data institutions may focus their activities on governing access to data 
provided by data contributors. But other institutions may be more actively involved 
across the lifecycle, including collecting, processing, managing and transforming 
data. These all entail different relationships and commitments. 
What is a data institution trusted to do? 
The different people, communities and organisations that interact with a data 
institution will have different expectations of it, depending on the role that they play. 
 
Data contributors​ (including individuals mentioned in the data if it contains personal 
data) need to trust the data institution to govern access to the data, such that it is 
shared and used in accordance with the rules defined by the data institution. This 
might include taking into account consent and preferences, keeping data secure, 
safeguarding privacy, protecting the reputation of data contributors, and creating 
value and impact from the data. 
 
Data users​, and the ​decision makers​ who use the tools and services created from 
institution-stewarded data, need to trust the data institution to deal with their 
data-access requests fairly and equitably, and to supply data in a timely and reliable 
way. They need to trust that the data institution is stewarding the most appropriate 
data to meet intended uses, in line with the data institution’s purpose, and is being 
open about its limitations. They also need to trust that the data institution is not going 
to expose them to legal or reputational risks when it provides them with access to the 
data. 
 
8
 Financial Reporting Council (2018), ‘UK Corporate Governance Code’, 
https://www.icaew.com/technical/corporate-governance/codes-and-reports/uk-corporate-governance-code  
9
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots’, p48, 
https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  6 

 
 
Those people, organisations and communities that might be affected by the sharing 
and use of data need to trust: that the institution will only share data with those who 
will advance the institution’s purpose; and that data is used to benefit them, or at 
least to do them no harm. They might also trust it to maintain proactive engagement 
with them, and listen and respond to their views. 
 
Funders ​tend to support data institutions with the aim of encouraging healthy data 
ecosystems, pursuing philanthropic goals or as part of performing their public 
function. Therefore they need to trust the data institution to maximise the economic, 
societal or environmental value of the data it stewards, as defined by the data 
institution’s purpose. 
Data institutions as trust intermediaries 
Some of a data institution’s trustworthiness will depend on other people and 
organisations, including data contributors and data users; it is therefore a trust 
intermediary. 
 
A data institution needs to assess and demonstrate the trustworthiness of one party 
on behalf of others to be confident that it can be trusted itself, since a failure to do so 
can affect its own reputation. This is especially important if any parties are legally 
liable for any negative outcomes or harmful behaviour. A data institution can increase 
the trustworthiness of these stakeholders in several ways, such as by providing tools 
and training, or through binding their behaviour through formal contracts. 
 
Data users need to be trusted to accurately declare what they are intending to do 
with the data and not to cause harm through their use of it. Data users can be 
monitored to ensure they are keeping to the terms of any data-sharing agreements. 
This could include assurances that data is only accessed by those authorised to do 
so; that data is not shared with unauthorised people; and that data is kept secure if it 
is transferred between sites. 
 
Data contributors, be they organisations or community volunteers, need to be 
10
trusted to provide continued access to good quality-data that is of trustworthy 
provenance and is useful to the purpose of the data institution. 
 
People represented in the data need to trust the data institution – as a representative 
of the data contributors – to: collect only the required data; hold the data securely; 
and delete the data when it is no longer needed. 
 
A data institution will often store data and mediate interactions using technology, so it 
needs to ensure the trustworthiness of its suppliers, technical solutions, products and 
services – including algorithms. 
11
 
Finally, the people, organisations and communities affected by potential uses of the 
data need to trust the data institution – as a representative of the data users and 
decision makers – not to cause them harm. 
10
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Collaborative data patterns’, ​https://collaborative-data.theodi.org  
11
 Harvard Data Science Review (2020), ‘Should we trust algorithms?’, ​https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/56lnenzj  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  7 

 
 
The external ecosystem 
The trust ecosystem also extends to actors beyond the immediate environment of the 
data institution: this wider ecosystem includes legislators, regulators, oversight 
bodies, journalists, certifying bodies, insurers, and external bodies offering both 
oversight and redress. 
12
 
Despite best intentions, sometimes things go wrong. These external bodies provide 
assurance that data contributors, data users and the people, organisations and 
communities affected by the use of data will be protected. Trust in the external 
environment – such as in the effective enforcement of data protection law – gives 
stakeholders confidence to place trust in a data institution. This is one of the ways 
that trust can be established even when there is little prior evidence for the behaviour 
of a data institution, for example when it is newly established. 
 
Assurance might come from an agreement with the data institution, such that it will 
accept liability or provide redress (see box below), or from the surrounding 
environment, such as the ability to take legal action to recover costs or reputation. 
Mechanisms such as relevant insurance policies help to provide assurance that the 
data institution will be able to satisfy any financial commitments this entails. 
 
Throughout this report, we refer to the actors who interact with data institutions 
collectively as stakeholders, to differentiate them from communities who may be 
impacted by the use and sharing of data. 
 
 
Accountability, liability and redress 
An important expectation of a data institution is that it should protect all of its 
stakeholders from harm. A data institution will be responsible and accountable 
for incidents, whether harms or errors arise intentionally or unintentionally. This 
can mean being legally liable or enacting redress mechanisms. 
 
Liability or redress don’t intrinsically make data institutions more trustworthy, 
but they provide confidence that undesirable or damaging situations will be 
remedied if trust is misplaced or something goes wrong. That assurance might 
come from agreements with the data institution that it will accept liability, or 
from an oversight body or authority that is external to the data institution. 
 
Accountability, liability and redress have different legal definitions: 
13
 
Accountability ​means being available to give an account, rationale or 
explanation for an action or state of affairs. Sources of accountability can be 
12
 In ways similar to the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) for financial institutions. Financial 
Services Compensation Scheme (n.d.), ​https://www.fscs.org.uk/ 
13
 Cornock M (2011), ‘Legal definitions of responsibility, accountability and liability’, 
https://www.deepdyve.com/lp/royal-college-of-nursing-rcn/legal-definitions-of-responsibility-accountability-and-
liability-zkI79QFMtC  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  8 

 
 
legislative, organisational, contractual or informal. Systems of accountability 
14
provide reassurance that the behaviour of an organisation is being monitored 
and controlled. Such systems must be well designed, so as not to introduce 
15
perverse incentives. 
16
 
When legislation or a contract means that a party is legally answerable to 
another party, we say they are ​liable​. Failure of a person or entity to meet that 
responsibility can result in a court judgment. 
 
The standard contractual penalty is financial damages. However, there are 
situations where damages are not sufficient, and it may be necessary to compel 
or stop a certain action. These are called ‘equitable remedies’ or ‘​redress​’, and 
require clauses to be written into contracts or agreements. Redress functions 
as a restorative force in the ecosystem if something goes wrong, similar to an 
insurance policy.  
 
Remedies include: 
●monetary compensation, similar to contractual damages 
●correcting public information, for example, to restore someone’s 
reputation 
●deletion of data shared by a data institution 
●re-running processes that were affected by procedural flaws or bias. 
 
The ability to seek redress should be easily accessible, responsive, not be 
unduly expensive or time-consuming, and be understandable. Appropriate 
redress for those affected by technology-driven harms is still developing. 
Doteveryone’s ongoing research into better online redress has three 
recommendations that are relevant to data institutions: 
17
 
●Define meaningful outcomes for redress, where not all harms are 
financial. 
●Develop new structures of redress fit for the scale and pace of online 
services. 
●Make it easier for people to navigate digital complexity. 
 
 
 
 
  
14
 McGrath S, Whitty J (2018), ‘Accountability and responsibility defined’, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324582377_Accountability_and_responsibility_defined  
15
 O’Neill O (2018), ‘Assessment, public accountability and trust’, 
https://www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/images/126032-baroness-onora-o-neill.pdf  
16
 O’Neill O (2002), ‘Reith Lectures 2002: Lecture 3: Called to account’, 
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/rmhttp/radio4/transcripts/20020417_reith.pdf  
17
 Doteveryone (2019), ‘Seeking redress in the online world – the current challenges’, 
https://www.doteveryone.org.uk/2019/12/seeking-redress-in-the-online-world-the-current-challenges  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  9 

 
 
Being trustworthy and 
being trusted 
The degree to which we trust a person or organisation determines the agreements we 
are willing to enter into with them, and how we act and behave towards them. 
 
There are various frameworks for describing trust, trustworthiness and what it means 
to be trusted. These frameworks attempt to distil trust into a few components like 
“credibility, reliability, intimacy and self-orientation”, “honesty, competence and 
18
reliability”, or “rigorous logic, authenticity and empathy”. 
1920
 
Each trust framework ​starts from the same premise​: that trust involves 
communicating and meeting expectations. This can be paraphrased as: ‘I want to be 
trusted ​to do X​, and I will attempt to demonstrate to others that I am trustworthy. I 
trust another ​to do Y​, and will attempt to assess that my trust is well placed’. 
 
For this report, we have drawn especially on a framework developed by Dr Kieron 
21
O’Hara at the University of Southampton. It is a useful basis for our research because 
it describes trust using components that scale well from interpersonal to institutional 
contexts, while sidestepping debates about human nature and the role of authorities.
 The framework also explains how being trustworthy is different from being trusted, 
22
and how the two must be aligned to avoid a breakdown of trust, and offers a useful 
way to reason about where trust can break down. 
 
This section uses the ecosystem of actors introduced in the previous section to 
summarise and expand on the framework developed by O’Hara. After introducing a 
number of useful concepts and vocabulary, we examine a range of ways that trust 
between parties operates and can break down.  
 
As the nature of trust is relational, in this section we have used named people ('Alice' 
and 'Ben') to help demonstrate the relationships. 
A framework for trust  
O’Hara’s framework for trust starts with the notion of trustworthiness. Within his 
framework, a person or organisation is ​trustworthy​ if they do what they have 
committed to do. More specifically, they are trustworthy if they are ​able​, ​willing​ and 
18
 Trusted Advisor (n.d.), ‘Understanding the trust equation’, 
https://trustedadvisor.com/why-trust-matters/understanding-trust/understanding-the-trust-equation  
19
 O’Neill O, Bardrick J (2017), ‘Trust, trustworthiness and transparency’, 
https://www.thebritishacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Trust-Trustworthiness-Transparency.pdf  
20
 Frei F (2018), ‘How to build (and rebuild) trust’, ​https://www.ted.com/talks/frances_frei_how_to_build_and_rebuild_trus​ t 
21
O’Hara K (2012), ‘A general definition of trust’, ​https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/341800/1/ohara_trust_working_paper_aug_2012.pdf  
22
 Mouritz T (2010), ‘Comparing the social contracts of Hobbes and Locke’, 
https://www.murdoch.edu.au/School-of-Law/_document/WA-jurist-documents/WAJ_Vol1_2010_Tom-Mouritz---
Hobbes-%26-Locke.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  10 

 
 
motivated​ to act or behave in such a way that makes good on their commitments. 
Furthermore, they are able, willing and motivated to behave this way in specific 
contexts,​ and to the benefit of a particular ​audience​,​ ​which can include themselves, 
but will usually be others. 
 
The framework further distinguishes between being ​trustworthy​ and being ​trusted​. 
The main difference is that ​being trusted​ is relational and involves an assessment by 
another party. For example, ‘Ben’ must believe ‘Alice’ to be trustworthy before he 
places his trust​ in her. He must judge Alice’s ability, willingness and motivation to do 
as he expects her to do; the two need a common understanding of the boundaries of 
the context in which Alice operates and the audience she intends to benefit from her 
actions; and he needs to correctly interpret all her behaviours as ultimately benefiting 
that same audience.  
 
If Alice is unable to adequately demonstrate to Ben that she is trustworthy, or if Ben 
is unable to adequately assess whether Alice can indeed be trusted, then trust might 
not be given when it is deserved. Or trust might be given when it is not warranted, for 
instance if Alice is not as trustworthy as she claimed or if Ben doesn’t accurately 
assess her trustworthiness. As we will describe later, trust can also break down after 
it is given. 
 
 
Components of trust 
O’Hara’s framework describes the components of trust; here we summarise 
how they apply to data institutions. 
 
Ability, willingness and motivation 
Alice’s ability to do as she claims is fundamental to her trustworthiness. But in 
order to act, as well as being favourable to an idea, she also needs an intrinsic 
or extrinsic reason or incentive. For example, if Alice is a medical researcher, 
23
she may be ​able ​and ​willing​ to share her research findings, but until she is 
motivated​ by the prospect of collaboration, she will delay doing so. 
 
A data institution’s ​ability ​to steward data on behalf of others depends on its 
access to technology, resources and funding. It must also be ​willing ​to steward 
data on behalf of others, by having it as part of its vision or mission. It may also 
have a mix of positive and negative ​motivations,​ such as contributing towards a 
societal goal, or a legal compulsion. 
 
Context 
People are not equally able, willing or motivated in all circumstances. Instead, 
Alice’s context is the specific circumstances in which she claims to be 
trustworthy, for example teaching mathematics, providing advice during office 
hours, or carrying out research into heart disease. Context might be extremely 
precise, such as described in a contract. Or it might be informally assumed 
through social norms, or have to be clarified over time, for example through 
case law. 
 
A data institution’s context will depend on its role within the ecosystem, the type 
23
 Bénabou R, Tirole J (2003), ‘Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation’, ​https://www.princeton.edu/~rbenabou/papers/RES2003.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  11 

 
 
of data, and the domain. It could include aspects of data management, and 
control of how data is used. The limits and expectations of the circumstances in 
which a data institution should be trustworthy are broadly defined and still 
evolving. 
 
Audience 
Alice’s audience are those who she anticipates will benefit from her 
trustworthiness. Her promises will sometimes be precisely targeted to certain 
individuals or groups. At the very least, Alice’s audience would reasonably 
expect not to be harmed as a result of her behaviour. 
 
The target audiences for a data institution’s trustworthiness will include all the 
actors within its ecosystem, as well as those using the insights, products and 
services that it enables; and people, organisations and communities affected by 
the sharing and use of the data it stewards. The diversity of these audiences 
adds complexity to the challenge of being trustworthy and trusted. 
 
Actions, behaviours, claims and commitments 
Alice may make claims or commitments about how she is willing, able and 
motivated to behave to serve the interests of the audience she is targeting. 
These might be open-ended or quite precise claims. 
 
These claims may be open to interpretation. For example, a data institution may 
be very precise about the goal it is working towards, but it may give itself leeway 
in how it achieves this. 
 
As claims become more explicit, they begin to resemble a contract. But it may 
be that expectations of behaviour are defined by unwritten, implicit social 
norms; being a ‘good steward’ implies a lot of things and raises a lot of 
expectations, but is very open-ended.  
 
A data institution represents itself as being willing, able and motivated to carry 
out stewardship duties on behalf of others. How it is expected to behave may be 
defined in contracts, but there will also be an implicit expectation that their 
operation will not cause harm to their audience. 
How trust breaks down 
The trust framework outlined above is a useful way of pinpointing and describing the 
various components of trust and the calculations that often go into determining 
whether or not a person or organisation can be trusted to do what they have 
committed themselves to do. Crucially, the framework also offers a means of 
analysing the different ways that trust can be lost, broken or diminished.  
 
Misrepresentation 
 
It may be that Alice makes a ​misrepresentation​ (of her ability, willingness, etc). This 
is where we look for evidence to root out bad actors, dishonesty, incompetence or 
unreliability. But it might also be that Alice underestimates her own abilities and is 
more trustworthy than she declares. Whether positive or negative, intentional or 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  12 

 
 
unintentional, misrepresentations mean that Ben’s trust in Alice is misaligned with 
what is warranted. 
An example of​ misrepresentation​ of a data institution’s ability might be if it provides 
data contributors with assurances about data protection, but does not have good 
security measures in place, which comes to light when it suffers a data breach. 
 
Misunderstanding 
 
 ​It may be that Alice and Ben have a ​misunderstanding​. This arises when there is a 
failure of communication such that Alice and Ben have different interpretations of the 
context, audience or expected behaviour. Again, misunderstandings can mean that 
Ben places the wrong level of trust (too much or too little) in Alice. 
A ​misunderstanding​ of the audience could arise when a data institution claims to 
have a social benefit purpose, such as improving healthcare, and furthers that 
purpose by sharing data with private sector organisations, such as pharmaceutical 
companies. The data institution may see their purpose at a system level, and the 
development of new drugs as ultimately contributing to better healthcare. But data 
contributors may have a narrower view, and see companies making profit through 
using data about them as unacceptable. 
 
Inability to determine 
 
It may be that Ben is ​unable to determine​ sufficient evidence to decide how much 
trust to place in Alice. This lack of evidence may raise the risk for Ben, of both 
misrepresentations and misunderstandings, such that he errs on the side of caution. 
If Alice is indeed trustworthy, this results in an opportunity cost of not entering into an 
agreement that could otherwise have been mutually beneficial. It is therefore 
important for Alice to produce sound evidence of her ability, willingness and 
motivation (reducing the risk of misrepresentation), and clarity about her context, 
audience and expected behaviour (reducing the risk of misunderstanding). 
A stakeholder might be ​unable to determine​ how much to trust a data institution if it 
cannot get access to information about the sources of the data it stewards, or the 
process through which requests for access are granted. 
 
Failure to communicate changes 
 
 ​It may be that Alice ​fails to communicate changes in circumstances​. Her ability 
may be hindered, or Alice’s context or audience – and therefore behaviour – changes 
in ways Ben is unaware of or didn’t expect. Ben’s expectations may no longer be 
aligned with Alice’s reality. It is important that Ben is given the opportunity to 
re-evaluate how much trust to place in her, and revise any agreements he has 
entered into with her. 
A ​failure to communicate a change in circumstances​ might arise if a data 
institution is absorbed into, or spun out of, another organisation and this is not 
communicated clearly; or if new data contributors or data users enter into 
agreements with the data institution, particularly if those organisations have poor 
reputations. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  13 

 
 
Being trustworthy with 
data 
“The trustworthiness of a data institution is a product of the 
people, systems and processes that enable and support 
trustworthy stewardship of data.” 
24
 
Being trustworthy with data is not the same as being trusted with data. When we talk 
about the trustworthiness of data institutions, we are primarily looking at internal 
processes, capabilities or legal compliance related to how a data institution will 
reliably deliver on what it promises.  
 
When we talk about a data institution being trusted, on the other hand, we are 
looking at what a data institution can do to demonstrate its trustworthiness to other 
parties, to ensure those parties are able to assess its trustworthiness and so decide 
whether they can trust it to steward important data.  
 
The following two sections of this report examine these two related topics, starting 
with how to be trustworthy with data. This section ends with a discussion of things a 
data institution ​should ​or ​may​ do, but we start with what a data institution ​must​ do in 
order to be trustworthy with data. 
A system of rules 
As a foundation, a trustworthy data institution is expected to follow a system of rules. 
Rules such as laws, regulations or codes of practice define the ​behaviours​ expected 
of a data institution. In some cases, the rules stipulate what the data institution is ​not 
allowed to do. As well as motivating a data institution to act in a trustworthy way, this 
system of rules provides a base set of criteria that defines what it ​means​ to be 
trustworthy with data, against which we can judge whether a data institution has 
done what it must do. 
 
These rules may be mandated by the data institution’s environment, stated by the 
data institution itself, or may be implicit because of social or industry norms. 
 
Laws and regulations 
 
Laws and regulations define the ​behaviours​ expected of a data institution by an 
authorising body. Some laws and regulations are principle based, rather than being 
proscriptive, and therefore are intended to encourage or stimulate, rather than 
proscribe. The promise of rewards (such as tax breaks) or the threat of penalties or 
punishments can increase a data institution’s ​motivation​ to comply. 
 
24
 Paraphrased from UK Statistics Authority (2018), ‘Code of Practice for Statistics’, 
https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/code-of-practice  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  14 

 
 
Data institutions should have a good understanding of the duties and powers set out 
in legislation and regulation, and ensure these are applied in its governance and 
management. Referring to specific legislation and oversight bodies in terms and 
conditions, and policy statements both informs stakeholders of their rights, and 
demonstrates that the data institution is aware of, and is adhering to, legislation. 
Legislation relevant to data institutions in the UK includes: 
 
●Data Protection Act 2018: includes the General Data Protection Regulation 
25
(GDPR) and is applicable to a data institution stewarding personal data. 
●Consumer Rights Act 2015: includes rights for the consumer regarding 
26
digital content, including in relation to services provided for free. 
●Equalities Act 2010: mandates against discriminatory practices so that a 
27
data institution provides equal access to users. 
●Protection of Freedoms Act 2012: relevant to data institutions collecting 
28
data such as CCTV footage. 
●Digital Economy Act 2017: addresses data sharing across government 
29
including statistical information and a range of media, internet and mobile 
phone laws. Outlines some of Ofcom’s (Office of Communications) oversight 
requirements. 
●UK Copyright and Rights in Databases Regulations 1997: describes 
30
intellectual property rights in databases and other content. 
 
Contracts 
 
Legally enforceable contracts help align different parties’ expectations in several 
respects: they define expected ​behaviour​, clarify the bounds of the ​context​ of a data 
institution, and may specify its ​audience​. Contracts greatly reduce the risk that these 
aspects will be misunderstood by parties. Penalties for breaking the terms of a 
contract increase a data institution’s ​motivation​ to follow the rules it agreed to. 
 
Penalties 
 
The threat of penalties, sanctions, fines and punishments gives us confidence that a 
person or organisation will be ​motivated​ to comply with rules because they will incur 
a sufficient cost if they do not. It is, however, necessary to trust in the external 
enforcement system, whether that be legal, regulatory or reputational. Whereas 
penalties are supposed to dis-incentivise harmful behaviour, redress is designed to 
provide recompense to any harmed parties. See ‘Accountability, liability and redress’ 
above. 
 
Legal agreements and laws define expected behaviour that has the backing of an 
external enforcement authority. However, there are other voluntary rules defining 
trustworthy behaviour that have been developed for self-guidance, to meet a need, or 
that codify community expectations. 
 
 
 
25
 UK Parliament (2018), ‘Data Protection Act’, ​http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukpga/2018/12  
26
 UK Parliament (2015), ‘Consumer Rights Act’, ​https://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukpga/2015/15  
27
 UK Parliament (2010), ‘Equalities Act’, ​http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukpga/2010/15  
28
 UK Parliament (2012), ‘Protection of Freedoms Act’, ​https://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukpga/2012/9  
29
 UK Parliament (2017), ‘Digital Economy Act’, ​https://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukpga/2017/30 
30
 Cooley Go, ‘What you need to know about UK database rights’, 
https://www.cooleygo.com/what-you-need-to-know-about-uk-database-rights  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  15 

 
 
Standards 
 
Standards are documented, reusable agreements that are used for consistency, to 
enable processes to be replicated, to make comparisons, or to reach a shared 
understanding. They include technical definitions, data formats, specifications for 
313233
quality standards and management processes. If we know something complies with 
34
a standard, we can be confident how it will ​behave​. 
 
In some industries, compliance with some standards will be expected, if not 
mandated by regulation. In other cases, implementing a standard may be voluntary 
as a way of improving an internal process, or to make it easier for others to interact. 
 
An accredited body can certify compliance with a standard as a measure of 
assurance, although it is not always necessary. 
 
Policies, processes, principles and codes 
 
Developing and publishing policies, codes of conduct, or lists of principle or values 
signal a data institution’s ​willingness​ to ​behave​ in a particular way. Examples 
include: 
 
●ORCID’s organisational principles set out its ways of working to create a 
35
trustworthy, sustainable data infrastructure. 
●Council of Europe’s 12 Principles of Good Governance describe the 
36
responsible conduct of public affairs and management of public resources.  
●The Code of Practice for Statistics aims to ‘provide the framework to ensure 
37
that statistics are trustworthy, good quality and valuable’.  
●The Chartered Institute of Auditors’ codes of professional conduct and ethics
 aim to raise the professionalism of internal auditing. 
38
 
Norms 
 
Norms are implicit or ‘unwritten rules’ of ​behaviour​ typically determined by social or 
cultural convention. Sometimes norms become codified as guidelines, standards or 
39
codes, especially in growing communities where new members need to learn the 
40
community’s norms in order to participate successfully.  
 
Examples of norms include user experience (UX) practices; vocabulary; what is meant 
by terms like ‘respectful’ or ‘doing the right thing’; and what might be considered 
proportionate or fair use of data. 
31
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Open standards for data’, ​https://standards.theodi.org  
32
 Wikipedia (2020), ‘USB standard’, ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB  
33
 Office for National Statistics (2020), ‘Data standards’, 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/aboutus/transparencyandgovernance/datastrategy/datastandards  
34
 International Organization for Standardization (2020), ‘ISO-27001: Information security management’, 
https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html  
35
 ORCID (2011), ‘Our principles’, ​https://orcid.org/about/what-is-orcid/principles  
36
 Council of Europe (2020), ‘12 principles of good governance and ELoGE’, 
https://rm.coe.int/12-principles-brochure-final/1680741931  
37
 Office for Statistics Regulation (2018), ‘Code of Practice for Statistics’, 
https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/code-of-practice  
38
 Chartered Institute of Auditors (2020), ‘Our standards and ethics’, 
https://www.iia.org.uk/about-us/our-standards-and-ethics  
39
 Kalkman S, et al (2019), ‘Responsible data sharing in international health research: a systematic review of 
principles and norms’, ​https://bmcmedethics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12910-019-0359-9  
40
 Open Data Commons (2020), ‘Community norms’, ​https://opendatacommons.org/norms/odc-by-sa.1.html  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  16 

 
 
 
Because norms are usually unwritten and can evolve over time, they make it difficult 
to establish or determine trustworthiness. It is easy to unintentionally make a mistake 
or misinterpret others, especially for those new to a community or domain. Although 
the ‘penalties’ for not following established norms are likely to be social or 
reputational, rather than legal or financial.  
Ethical design 
Rules define explicit, externally defined and enforced expectations of a data 
institution, but many of the expectations of how a data institution should steward 
data are informal and implicit. The rapidly changing context in which a data 
41
institution operates – in particular with regard to increasing capability of technology, 
availability of data, and awareness of potential harms caused by data misuse – 
makes it hard to determine fixed rules. 
 
Just as the rules and regulations recommend that organisations working with data 
should build in privacy and security by design, data ethics should be built in by 
42
design into every organisation stewarding data, typically through the publication of 
ethical principles, and embedding those principles into processes and practice. 
 
Ethical principles and values outline how an organisation ideally ​wishes​ to ​behave​, 
and what it is not ​willing​ to do, often to protect specific ​audiences​. Publishing 
principles and values could be taken as a sign of intrinsic ​motivation​. 
 
Ethical principles should be developed collaboratively so that they capture the 
expectations of a data institution’s audiences. Once published, they can be used to 
hold the data institution to account.  
43
 
However, what people perceive to be ethical and unethical use of data is rapidly 
evolving, and codes of practice are likely to quickly go out of date. This means data 
ethics principles need to be practical, and need to evolve.  
 
Principles and values can also be difficult to put in practice: they can be too vague to 
offer clear guidance for day-to-day decisions.  
 
Practical ethical systems and processes can be developed early in the organisation’s 
lifecycle, and embedded into organisational design, governance practices and 
processes, and the way the data institution develops products and services. 
44
 
Many practical data ethics tools exist, including Doteveryone’s Consequence 
Scanning, the Data Ethics Self Assessment tool by the UK Statistics Authority and 
4546
41
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Building trust in how you handle data: a hierarchy’, 
https://theodi.org/article/building-trust-in-how-you-handle-data-a-hierarchy 
42
 For example, Information Commissioner’s Office (2018), ‘Data protection by design and default’, 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gd
pr/accountability-and-governance/data-protection-by-design-and-default 
43
 Raji I, et al (2020), ‘Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic 
auditing’, ​https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.00973  
44
 NowNext Design (2017), ‘Ethical design sprints’, ​https://www.cennydd.com/ethical-design-sprint-schedule  
45
 Doteveryone (2019), ‘Consequence scanning’, 
https://www.doteveryone.org.uk/project/consequence-scanning  
46
 UK Statistics Authority (2019), ‘Ethics self-assessment’, 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  17 

 
 
the ODI’s Data Ethics Canvas. Most of these tools include guidance on identifying 
47
who may be affected by the stewarding or use of data, and recommend engagement 
with stakeholders and those affected by the use of data, particularly in the event of 
something going wrong. 
Organisational design 
Organisational design is the process of aligning the structure of an organisation with 
its objectives, with the aim of improving efficiency and effectiveness. It includes, for 
48
example, the business model, revenue model, and legal and corporate structures.  
49
 
A data institution needs to ensure sustainable organisational and financial ​ability​ to 
implement good governance and deliver on its purpose. Certainly “crises of financial 
sustainability (or challenges of expansion) for these organisations are often coupled 
with or lead to a crisis in governance and/or community trust”. 
50
 
All five of the experts we interviewed for this report highlighted the relationship 
between trust and organisational sustainability. Issues of trustworthiness that they 
associated with sustainability included fitness of technical systems; data protection; 
creating high-quality and useful data; and building a sense of community. For 
example, the representative from MusicBrainz said, “[A culture of honesty] builds 
trust, and this trust builds sustainability”. 
 
In some cases, the structure of an organisation expresses ​willingness​ and 
motivation​ to act in its stakeholders’ interests over and above a profit motive. For 
example, after several years of operation, OpenCorporates created the 
OpenCorporates Trust to oversee their public interest purpose: “[our corporate 
51
structure] ensures we’ll always be independent and always act in the public interest 
and follow the rules that we’ve set ourselves”. 
 
Legal forms, such as trusts, charities, community interest corporations, and industrial 
and provident societies, are organisational structures that legally enshrine social 
52
objectives rather than financial duty to shareholders. But it is not as simple as 
choosing a not-for-profit structure. For some data institutions, a commercial or 
profit-driven business model might interfere with the types of value they are trying to 
deliver, whereas for others, a commercial focus might enable them to invest more in, 
and maximise the value from, their services. 
53
 
https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/about-the-authority/committees/nsdec/data-ethics/self-assessment-2  
47
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘The data ethics canvas’, ​https://theodi.org/article/data-ethics-canvas  
48
 University of Southampton (n.d.), ‘Organisational development & design explained’, 
https://www.southampton.ac.uk/hr/services/od-explained/index.page  
49
  Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y (2010), ‘Business model generation: a handbook for visionaries, game changers, and 
challengers’, 
https://www.wiley.com/en-gb/Business+Model+Generation%3A+A+Handbook+for+Visionaries%2C+Game+Cha
ngers%2C+and+Challengers-p-9780470876411  
50
 Bilder G, Lin J, Neylon C (2015), ‘Principles for open scholarly infrastructure’, 
https://wiki.lib.sun.ac.za/images/f/f6/2015-principle-for-open-scholary-communication-infrastructures.pdf 
51
 OpenCorporates (2018), ‘Announcing the OpenCorporates Trust’, 
https://blog.opencorporates.com/2018/06/11/announcing-the-opencorporates-trust  
52
 GOV.UK (2011), ‘Legal forms for social enterprise: a guide’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/legal-forms-for-social-enterprise-a-guide  
53
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/sustainable-data-institutions  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  18 

 
 
Considering different audience’s ethical expectations could affect the organisational 
design and governance of the data institution. Kieron O’Hara’s paper ‘Data trusts: 
ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy data stewardship’ explains: “Not 
all [audiences] can be pleased all at once. The purpose of the data trust should 
realistically be to benefit one or two of these [classes of audience]. The rules and 
ethical principles of the trust should be tailored to create the optimal signals of 
trustworthiness to those classes.” For example, an organisation designed primarily 
54
to be trusted by data contributors might emphasise corporate structures that enable 
independent stewardship; whereas one designed to primarily create trust among 
individuals mentioned in the data might de-emphasise business models that depend 
on sharing data with third parties. 
 
Independent stewardship is necessary for some data institutions such as data trusts,
 to ensure trustworthy decisions about data access. They can demonstrate their 
55
independence by screening out conflicts of interest; recruiting a diverse board; and 
choosing a funding model that doesn’t override the data institution’s purpose. 
 
The ODI’s research into sustainable data institutions identified tensions in relation to 
56
some common institutional goals that would influence the organisational structure 
and funding. For example, charging data users to access data creates tension by 
incentivising the data institution to share data with more users in order to secure 
greater revenue. Resolving these tensions is necessary to align the expectations of 
different stakeholders, without which there is risk of losing their trust. 
Organisational governance 
Governance practices attempt to align the interests of stakeholders and define 
57
which ​audiences​ benefit from the data institution’s operation and how. Publishing 
governance materials, such as charters or terms of reference, provides clarity and 
transparency about the activities and behaviours that stakeholders should expect. 
 
Good governance helps a data institution be more trustworthy by setting rules for 
itself and designing internal structures and processes to ensure those rules are 
followed, usually in a way that is transparent to stakeholders. As such, governance 
assures, controls and communicates a data institution’s ​behaviour​; as well as its 
ability​ and ​willingness​ to act towards its stated purpose. 
 
A data institution’s governance model needs to be appropriate to its operating 
context and for whom it needs to build trust. Research from Nesta suggests two axes
 that could influence governance models for data institutions stewarding personal 
58
data. One axis represents how much control or choice the individual has in 
determining how data is shared and used; and the other is whether value from using 
the data is public (benefiting everyone) or private (benefiting data users).  
54
 O’Hara K (2019), ‘Data trusts: ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy data stewardship’, 
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/428276  
55
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots’, 
https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report 
56
 ​Open Data Institute (2020), ‘R&D: Sustainable data institutions’ 
https://theodi.org/project/sustainable-data-institutions 
57
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2004), ‘G20/OECD principles of corporate 
governance’, ​http://www.oecd.org/corporate/principles-corporate-governance  
58
 Nesta (2019), ‘The new ecosystem of trust’, ​https://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/new-ecosystem-trust  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  19 

 
 
 
 
Source: Nesta | The new ecosystem of trust 
 
Where a data institution sits on these two axes determines its institutional 
governance. For example, a data institution that stewards data where individuals 
have little control over data sharing – and the data should benefit everyone – will 
require people in accountable roles who can explain why particular data sharing 
choices are made. In contrast, data institutions that create both public and private 
value, and where control is by individual consent, may better suit governance with 
networked trust relationships and collective decision-making similar to a 
co-operative. 
59
 
Guidance for publicly run organisations, such as the UK Corporate Governance 
60
Code, covers themes related to trust and is therefore relevant to data institutions. In 
61
terms of the trust framework we have built on in this report, the guidance talks about 
how to: 
 
Establish the data institution’s ​context​, and how its ​behaviour​ in this context 
contributes to its objectives 
for example, by aligning company culture with a clear purpose and strategy, and 
explaining the rationale for actions the company takes with consistency. 
 
Enable ​ability​ to maintain long-term sustainable success and achieve wider 
objectives  
for example, by recruiting an effective board, and ensuring they have the necessary 
time, resources and information available for the company to meet its objectives. 
 
Demonstrate ​willingness​ and ​motivation​ to be trustworthy  
for example, by ensuring and publicising how workforce policies and practices are 
consistent with the company’s values. 
59
 Hafen E (2019), ‘Personal data cooperatives – a new data governance framework for data donations and 
precision health’, ​https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-04363-6_9  
60
 Department for Transport (2018), ‘Ports good governance guidance’, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/684839/ports
-good-governance-guidance.pdf  
61
 Financial Reporting Council (2018), ‘UK Corporate Governance Code’, 
https://www.icaew.com/technical/corporate-governance/codes-and-reports/uk-corporate-governance-code  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  20 

 
 
 
Give wide-ranging consideration to diverse ​audiences​, including those who 
should benefit from, and those affected by, use of data  
for example, by establishing a board with diverse perspectives and giving regard to 
the interests of, and relationships with, employees, suppliers, customers, the wider 
community and the environment. 
 
Enable stakeholders to make ​informed judgements​ about the data institution’s 
trustworthiness  
for example, by setting high standards of transparency, and by using a variety of 
engagement approaches to communicate meaningfully and consistently with 
stakeholders. 
 
To be trustworthy, data governance and oversight should also extend beyond internal 
processes and data access to include how the data is used. It will almost certainly 
62
extend to the way in which data users use and onwardly share the data that has been 
shared with them. Depending on the design and function of the data institution, it 
may also extend to how data contributors manage, use and share data themselves. 
Technology has some role to play in monitoring adherence to the rules created by the 
data institution. 
The role of technology 
Technology is mainly used to bolster a data institution’s ​ability​ to keep to its data 
security commitments. Anonymisation techniques, for example, can help reduce the 
risk of re-identification of data subjects. Security techniques, access control and 
63
logging mechanisms help restrict and monitor access to data. 
 
The methods of data access and data formats should be reliable, sustainable and 
non-prohibitive in terms of cost and complexity to be considered trustworthy by 
those data users who are permitted access. 
“ 
Because trust is embedded in our social relationships 
and our relationships with technological systems,  
these are the areas policymakers must pay more 
attention to, in addition to data privacy and security 
issues.​
59 
 
Research from the University of Manchester cautions against viewing new digital 
services simply as new means of providing the same personal service. It suggests 
64
that we broaden the conversation around trust in technology beyond issues of 
privacy, security and data sharing, and consider its potential to disrupt the trusted 
62
 Tzovaras B (2019), ‘Alternative personal data governance models’, ​https://osf.io/preprints/metaarxiv/bthj7  
63
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Anonymisation and open data: an introduction to managing the risk of 
re-identification’, ​https://theodi.org/article/anonymisation-report 
64
 Ribeiro B (n.d.), ‘Beyond privacy and security: opening-up ‘trust’ in digital healthcare’, 
https://policyatmanchester.shorthandstories.com/on-digital-trust/index.html#group-Trust-in-Healthcare-RDrtklFazP 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  21 

 
 
relationships between people. For example, in the relationships between patients and 
caregivers, technology can change how and where care takes place, producing new 
forms of communication and attributing responsibility to new points of contact. 
 
Complex social issues like this mean data institutions might need to make efforts to 
be trusted in new ways. The next section discusses measures and mechanisms to 
mediate some of the relationships inherent in trust. 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  22 

 
 
Being trusted with data 
As we saw in the section ‘​How trust breaks down​’, there are several ways 
stakeholders’ trust in a data institution can be undermined. Many mechanisms have 
been developed to help people and organisations overcome these potential failures, 
and to bridge the gap between the understanding of those involved in a data 
institution and those who are trying to judge whether that institution can be trusted. 
 
Some of these mechanisms are intended to help people or organisations be more 
trustworthy, such as by undergoing training; some are designed to help people or 
organisations be more trusted, for example by publishing the minutes of meetings 
where decisions are made. Often mechanisms have a dual function, for example 
studying for an exam both teaches someone the material, and demonstrates to 
others that they have attained a certain level of qualification. 
 
Some of the measures will be implemented by the data institution itself, such as 
performance monitoring or drafting data sharing agreements; others are carried out 
by external actors to provide assurance, such as auditing and certification. 
 
Different mechanisms will address potential misunderstandings or misrepresentations for 
different components in the framework. For example, interviews are a way to interrogate 
someone’s abilities; drafting licences is a way to avoid misunderstandings about how 
data can be used in different contexts; and kitemarks help people determine how a data 
institution should behave in accordance with which quality standards. 
 
Understanding how these mechanisms relate to the trust framework, as introduced in 
the previous section of this report, can help data institutions use them more 
effectively to strengthen trustworthiness and build trust. 
Mapping trust mechanisms 
Drawing on our desk research and interviews, we identified a number of common 
mechanisms used by and between organisations to demonstrate or assess 
trustworthiness. We conducted a mapping exercise taking these various mechanisms 
and distributing them across a matrix with (i) the specific elements of trustworthiness 
(ability, willingness, etc) on one axis; and (ii) the possible ways trust can break down 
(misrepresentation, misunderstanding or the failure to communicate in times of 
change) on the other axis. The result of the mapping exercise is presented in 
Appendix B: Map of trust mechanisms​. 
 
While the mapping exercise is not authoritative or comprehensive, it reveals a number 
of insights. The main one is that ​there are gaps where no standard mechanism 
exists​; the gaps suggest areas where trust can easily break down. For example, it is 
not easy to prove one’s motivations. 
 
The second insight is that ​there is no panacea: ​we did not find any mechanism 
which would help prevent all possible ways trust can break down, nor did any 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  23 

 
 
mechanism appear to cover all the elements of the trust framework. Most 
mechanisms address one or two potential failure points.  
 
A notable exception is the use of contracts,​ ​which define expectations of behaviour, 
context and, in some cases, how benefit is to be distributed to the intended 
audience. Audits also address several aspects: defining and verifying a data 
institution’s ability or behaviours, and acting as evidence: if a data institution passes 
an audit, you can expect them to meet a certain standard of ability or behaviour. 
 
Communication and transparency 
 
A further insight surfaced by the mapping exercise was a lack of standard 
communication mechanisms. Although many mechanisms are designed to root out 
misrepresentation, a significant proportion of breakdowns of trust are caused by 
failures of communication – either to align understanding or to communicate changes. 
But we identified very few standard mechanisms to address this type of problem. 
 
Some mechanisms such as contracts or reports are themselves forms of 
communication. But effort to align understanding is particularly important between 
parties that aren’t covered by contracts or other more formal mechanisms. In these 
cases, proactive communication is vital. 
 
We can learn from the case of data sharing between the Royal Free Hospital and 
DeepMind. The Royal Free Hospital shared patient data with artificial intelligence (AI) 
company DeepMind, which was developing an app to help detect patients with acute 
kidney injury. The Information Commissioner’s Office ordered an audit of the app after 
widespread concerns from patient groups about the scale and scope of the project – in 
other words, the ​context​ and ​behaviours​ were not what the patients expected. In 
response, DeepMind resolved to increase and improve communication around future 
work. 
65
“ 
Explanations are a positive opportunity to 
communicate, not an onerous obligation. 
66
A data institution needs to consider communication in several respects: 
 
●Demonstrate it has considered and addressed all the ways it needs to prove 
its trustworthiness. 
●Ensure all parties have a shared understanding of the data institution’s 
context or purpose; of how behaviours and activities relate to the purpose of 
the data institution; and who will benefit from those activities. 
●Explain changes to circumstances that may change that shared 
understanding. 
65
 DeepMind (2017), ‘The Information Commissioner, the Royal Free, and what we’ve learned’, 
https://deepmind.com/blog/announcements/ico-royal-free  
66
 Financial Reporting Council (2018), ‘UK Corporate Governance Code’, 
https://www.icaew.com/technical/corporate-governance/codes-and-reports/uk-corporate-governance-code  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  24 

 
 
 
 
Intelligent transparency 
Transparency is common to many mechanisms where sharing or publishing 
evidence helps others make informed judgements. For example, publishing a 
record of decisions made by a data access board helps others determine if 
decisions are being made in the interest of the expected audience. 
 
Onora O’Neill cautions against transparency for transparency’s sake, since 
67
“increasing transparency can produce a flood of unsorted information and 
misinformation that provides little but confusion unless it can be sorted and 
assessed”. 
 
Instead, O’Neill advocates for ‘intelligent transparency’ and says that 
information should be: 
 
●accessible – people should be able to get at it 
●comprehensible – people should be able to understand it 
●useable – it should suit their needs 
●assessable – interested parties should, if necessary, be able to examine 
the workings and assess its quality. 
 
This view is echoed by David Pozen, who also cautions that “transparency 
68
mandates hold complex processes to unrealistic standards” and “there is 
nothing incoherent about transparency policies yielding positive outcomes in 
certain settings and negative or even opposite outcomes in other settings”.  
 
Pozen advises careful consideration of transparency’s relationship to 
governance goals, such as constructive deliberation, and advises implementing 
the means of transparency in service to each goal.  
 
Mechanisms throughout a data institution’s lifecycle 
 
Being trustworthy and being trusted both need to function over time. In our previous 
project to pilot data trusts, we proposed a simple lifecycle that describes the stages 
69
of setting up and running a data institution.  
 
67
 O’Neill O (2002), ‘Reith Lectures 2002: Lecture 4: Trust and transparency’, 
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/rmhttp/radio4/transcripts/20020427_reith.pdf  
68
 Pozen D (2019), ‘Seeing transparency more clearly’, ​https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3478005  
69
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots’, ​https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  25 

 
 
 
Image source: Open Data Institute 
 
Different mechanisms will be more appropriate in different phases in the lifecycle of a 
data institution. For example, use cases, ecosystem maps and empathy maps are 
7071
more likely to be used to create shared understanding in the scoping and co-design 
phases, while the context and audiences for the data institution are being defined. 
Whereas after launch, a data institution might use mechanisms of transparency such 
as decision logs or financial reporting to help stakeholders make accurate 
assessments of the data institution’s trustworthiness. 
Third party trust 
People and organisations can make claims about trustworthiness on another’s 
behalf. This is one of the ways that trust can scale. We cannot know everyone 
personally, so we rely on recommendations from organisations we trust, in turn to 
understand the trustworthiness of others.  
 
As we discussed previously, a data institution will need to act as a trust intermediary. 
Using this framework, we can see this role as providing assurances around another 
person or organisation’s ​ability​ to supply data that is of a particular quality, or to hold 
data securely. It may need to provide evidence that helps people decide whether to 
trust each other, or in some cases provide incentives that ​motivate​ stakeholders to 
behave as they claim. 
 
Other trusted people or organisations may also make claims about the 
trustworthiness of a data institution. For example, by being involved in the data 
institution, data contributors implicitly indicate that they trust it. More explicit claims 
of trustworthiness may be made by auditors or certifiers. 
70
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Mapping data ecosystems’, ​https://theodi.org/article/mapping-data-ecosystems 
71
 XPLANE (2017), ‘Updated empathy map canvas’, 
https://medium.com/the-xplane-collection/updated-empathy-map-canvas-46df22df3c8a  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  26 

 
 
Assessing trustworthiness 
Audits and certifications are assessments that can be conducted internally by a data 
institution to improve its own trustworthy operation, or externally by a third party. 
That third party could be a direct stakeholder – such as a prospective data 
contributor or user performing due diligence – or a trusted independent assessor, 
whose assessments are then used by prospective stakeholders. 
 
Audits  
 
Audits are tools for interrogating complex processes, often to determine whether they 
comply with company policy, industry standards or regulations. In this way, audits 
72
assess a data institution’s ​behaviours​ and ​ability​ to deliver on expectations.  
 
External audits typically examine the finances of an organisation; whereas internal 
audits consider the effectiveness of governance, risk management and control 
processes, and even wider issues such as the organisation’s reputation, growth and 
impact on the environment. 
73
 
A data institution will need to demonstrate to auditors that it is​ ​“delivering on its 
purposes, has effective processes for promoting beneficial use and mitigating harm, 
is appropriately assessing its non-financial impacts, is achieving an equitable balance 
between the needs of different stakeholders, and so on”. Assessment mechanisms 
74
might include stakeholder surveys and interviews, public research, and stress-tests of 
a data institution’s processes and policies. 
 
A data institution may pose challenges to traditional audits, however, due to the need 
for auditors to understand the operational and data contexts. There may eventually 
be the need to find auditing approaches that are specific to data institutions, for 
example, processes to determine compliance with declared ​willingness​ to uphold 
ethical principles. 
75
 
Certification 
 
Certification is a process where a third-party authoritative body verifies that a 
non-authoritative person, process, product or organisation meets standardised 
criteria. A certification will have a target audience such as customers, shareholders or 
regulators. If successful, the non-authoritative entity is allowed to signal compliance 
using mechanisms such as kitemarks. The certifying authority usually acts as an 
auditor to verify ongoing compliance, as well as having powers to enact redress 
mechanisms.  
 
We can trust certifying bodies by ensuring there is oversight of them by accreditors. 
72
 Liu J (2012), ‘The enterprise risk management and the risk oriented internal audit’, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272673574_The_Enterprise_Risk_Management_and_the_Risk_Oriente
d_Internal_Audit  
73
 Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (2020), ‘What is internal audit?’, 
https://www.iia.org.uk/about-us/what-is-internal-audit  
74
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: how decisions are made about data sharing’, 
https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-decision-making-report  
75
 Raji I, Smart A, White R(2020), ‘Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal 
algorithmic auditing’, ​https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.00973  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  27 

 
 
Accreditation confirms that the process of certification is carried out correctly. For 
example, the UK Accreditation Service and the International Accreditation Service. 
 
Certification is a special type of mechanism because it is designed to incorporate 
other mechanisms. For example, to meet ISO-9001 requirements, an organisation 
must ​train staff​ with adequate abilities, and define ​acceptance criteria​ for product 
behaviour. 
 
As such, certification serves many purposes: guidance; monitoring; independent 
accountability; and as a signal to others that an organisation has been through a 
rigorous process, which others may consider when deciding whether to trust it. 
 
Existing certifications that are likely to be relevant for data institutions include: 
 
●Technical expectations​ such as technical or security adequacy. For 
example the National Cyber Security Centre’s Cyber Security certification, 
76
which “helps you to guard against the most common cyber threats and 
demonstrate your commitment to cyber security”. 
●Organisational processes​ for example ISO-9001, which aims to ensure the 
quality of products and services by establishing a rigorous quality 
management system. 
77
●Organisational structure and mission​ for example B-Corp, which verifies 
whether a company meets “standards of social and environmental 
performance, public transparency, and legal accountability to balance profit 
and purpose”. 
78
●Comprehensive certification​ such as CoreTrustSeal’s Trustworthy Data 
Repositories certification, which certifies repositories that have an explicit 
79
mission to provide access to and preserve data. It covers matters of 
preservation, licences, financial and technical sustainability, ethics, 
organisational structure, guidance, data quality and integrity, evaluation, 
documentation, data discovery, enabling data reuse, technical infrastructure, 
and security. 
 
The costs of formal certification, which include employee training and auditors’ fees, 
need to be balanced against the value it brings in terms of the standard achieved and 
the signal of trustworthiness it produces. HESA told us it had let its ISO-9001 
certification lapse having “decided in the last few years that the benefits didn’t justify 
the costs involved [...] but we do still follow the procedures that were set up internally 
to comply”. 
 
Certifications need to be renewed and so are not a permanent guarantee. For 
example, OpenCorporates preferred to use irs organisational structure and 
governance processes to assure its public interest mission rather than certification 
because of the “overhead” involved and because the certification doesn’t provide 
protection: “there’s no guarantee the owners won’t sell to someone else the day after 
tomorrow and you’ll no longer be a B-corp after that”. 
 
76
 National Cyber Security Centre (2020), ‘Cyber essentials’, ​https://www.cyberessentials.ncsc.gov.uk  
77
 British Assessment Bureau (2018), ‘Quality management systems explained’, 
https://www.british-assessment.co.uk/insights/what-is-a-quality-management-system  
78
 Certified B Corporation (n.d.), ‘About B Corps’, ​https://bcorporation.net/about-b-corps  
79
 CoreTrustSeal (2019), ‘CoreTrustSeal Trustworthy Data Repositories Requirements’, 
https://www.coretrustseal.org/why-certification/requirements  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  28 

 
 
A certification of trustworthiness? 
Certifications often have specific requirements, for example, ‘product and service 
quality’ or ‘corporate responsibility’. At the time of writing, there is no known 
comprehensive ‘certification of trustworthiness with data’ that considers all 
aspects necessary to demonstrate trustworthiness and align trustworthiness and 
trust in a rigorous way. However, we suggest the CoreTrustSeal Trustworthy Data 
Repositories would make a good basis. 
 
A certification of trustworthiness might ask to what extent the data institution has: 
●communicated the quality and coverage of appropriate mechanisms, 
including laws and regulations, codes and standards 
●communicated the context, audience and behaviours to avoid 
misunderstandings throughout a data institution’s lifecycle 
●a plan to re-communicate and re-consent if one or more of the context, 
audience, behaviours or abilities were to change during the lifetime of the 
data institution. 
 
There are two options for such a certification:  
●An all-encompassing certification that would assess all aspects necessary 
to demonstrate trustworthiness and align trustworthiness and trust in a 
rigorous way. 
●Several focused certification bodies that assess separate aspects. In this 
case, the data institution may make use of advisory and consultancy 
services to create coherent coverage. 
 
Earlier research from Oxford Insights into certification for data trusts 
80
recommended the discovery, prototyping and testing of potential certification 
models with stakeholders. The ODI intends to follow these recommendations in a 
future phase of our research and development.  
 
 
Signals such as kitemarks or trustmarks may have limitations with some audiences. 
Doteveryone carried out extensive research into trustmarks for technology and 
81
found that they would take significant investment to establish, and with limited 
benefit. Requirements for a trustmark in the face of fast-changing technology 
services, and lack of consumer levers and interest in a domain where choices are 
already complex, led Doteveryone to conclude that a more effective solution would 
be to work with businesses to introduce a more flexible, value-based approach to 
ensure the trustworthiness of their processes and products. This could be coupled 
with lightweight accountability and enforcement, without the cost and scale of a full 
standards body or certification authority. 
  
80
 Oxford Insights (2019), ‘Exploring data trust certifications’, 
https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-will-certification-work-report  
81
 Doteveryone (2019), ‘Why we haven’t made a trustmark for technology’, 
https://www.doteveryone.org.uk/2019/09/digital-products-and-services-arent-bananas  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  29 

 
 
Trusting others 
In the section ​‘An ecosystem for trust’​, we discussed how a data institution needs to 
assess the trustworthiness of those parties it depends on or represents. It can do that 
using the same mechanisms described in the previous section. 
 
For example, when hiring staff, it may assess their ability through interviews, professional 
certification and exams; and data access panels within a data institution will assess 
whether prospective data users will behave in accordance with agreed criteria. 
 
But trust isn’t merely transactional; it is relational. Collaboration requires mutual trust. 
And for the relationships to be mutually beneficial, a data institution also needs to 
trust its stakeholders. 
Invest in capability to take collective decisions 
A data institution will have to make many decisions throughout its lifecycle. For 
example, what types of data users should have access to, what services to provide 
and what business model to adopt. 
 
Research into decision making for data trusts – by Communication Chambers and 
Involve and commissioned by the ODI – states: “Deliberative decision-making [...] is 
important for data [institutions], given wider societal mistrust and uncertainty around 
data sharing and use. A data [institutions]’s legitimacy – and, by extension, the trust 
of stakeholders – comes from its capacity to enable, encourage and benefit from 
collective discussion, reasoning and decision-making.” 
82
 
Before a data institution is willing to open its processes to external influence, it will 
need to trust that its stakeholders are invested in shared problems. By investing in 
stakeholders’ capability and skills to understand complicated issues, a data 
institution will have the confidence to act on the feedback and perspectives 
they provide. 
 
Many data institutions will have a broad stakeholder group with a range of economic 
and data literacy. True engagement requires sustained, iterative effort to produce 
accessible materials and develop a shared vocabulary that is meaningful to both 
sides of the conversation; and necessary for aligning understanding and trust. 
83
 
Even so, many organisations report positive experiences and successful engagement 
programmes involving diverse groups with a range of data literacy, such as the 
84
Royal Society’s public dialogue work on machine learning. The Ada Lovelace 
85
82
 Involve (2019), ‘Data trusts: how decisions are made about data sharing’, 
https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-decision-making-report  
83
 O’Hara K (2019), ‘Data trusts: ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy data stewardship’, 
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/428276  
84
 University of Manchester (2020), ‘We need to re-think health data sharing and public trust’, 
https://www.manchester.ac.uk/discover/news/we-need-to-re-think-health-data-sharing-and-public-trust-says-pub  
85
 Royal Society (2017) ‘Public views of machine learning’, 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  30 

 
 
Institute reports: “When engaged in a way that fosters critical democratic scrutiny, 
publics are capable of discussing the use of data in a sophisticated manner... 
[supporting] policymakers and regulators to broaden the conversation on the use and 
governance of data.” 
86
Be fearless, be honest 
Inevitably, even for trustworthy actors events don’t always go to plan or new 
information comes to light. By investing in stakeholder’s capability and skills to 
understand complicated issues, a data institution can trust in their discernment 
enough to be honest with them if something goes wrong. 
 
Data institutions that are not open with their stakeholders, or try to manage 
messaging, risk being misinterpreted as untrustworthy; as Onora O’Neill points out, 
deception is the real enemy of trust. O’Hara expands on this idea saying, “Even if 
87
the organisation has done everything it could and is not to blame for a breach, an 
ill-thought-out communication strategy gives an impression of a cover up.[...] At best, 
it means that the organisation is focused on its own problems of liability, and not on 
the harms to its stakeholders”. 
88
 
There are good examples of frank apologies, reparations, open post-mortems 
899091
and incident reports that have prevented a technical or procedural mishap from 
92
escalating into an issue of mistrust and damaging relationships. 
 
Honesty is the foundation on which to rebuild trust. If a data institution has built and 
maintained a relationship with its stakeholders using the techniques described in the 
rest of this report, they may be supportive.  
 
 
 
 
https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/machine-learning/publications/public-views-of-machine-learning-
ipsos-mori.pdf  
86
 Ada Lovelace Institute (2020), ‘Rethinking data’, ​https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/our-work/rethinking-data  
87
 O’Neill O (2002), ‘Reith Lectures 2002: Lecture 4: Trust and transparency’, 
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/rmhttp/radio4/transcripts/20020427_reith.pdf  
88
 O’Hara K (2019), ‘Data trusts: ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy data stewardship’, 
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/428276 
 
89
 Gitlab (2019), ‘Important updates to our terms of service and telemetry services’, 
https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/issues/34833  
90
 DeepMind (2017), ‘The Information Commissioner, the Royal Free, and what we’ve learned’, 
https://deepmind.com/blog/announcements/ico-royal-free  
91
 Google Cloud Platform (2020), ‘Fearless shared postmortems’, 
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/gcp/fearless-shared-postmortems-cre-life-lessons  
92
 Cloudflare (2020), ‘Post Mortem’, ​https://blog.cloudflare.com/tag/postmortem  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  31 

 
 
If you want to go far, go 
together 
“The failure on the part of policy and industry organisations 
to open up the conversation to the wider public has moved 
the current discourse on data out of step with people’s 
expectations and attitudes.”  
93
 
Trust is dynamic. It is built, and must be nurtured over time. The relationship between 
data institutions and the communities that surround and support them is one of 
mutual interaction and influence. A change or evolution of either of these is bound to 
have an impact on, or bring about changes in, the other. Over the life of a data 
institution, this changing relationship can present a number of challenges to the 
understanding between a data institution and its stakeholders. 
 
Stakeholder engagement is a means to continually align understanding, for example 
through open processes where external parties are able to influence outcomes 
through consultation, dialogue, negotiation, compromise and relationship building.  
 
Specialist engagement skills are required to identify stakeholders, incentivise 
participation, design events, facilitate and mediate, and summarise and feed back 
recommendations into existing processes. The complexity of the task should not be 
94
underestimated. A data institution will need access to people with the right skills, 
either in house or by working with specialist agencies. 
 
There are many engagement approaches appropriate to the message being 
communicated, the purpose of the engagement, and the needs of the group, 
including:  
 
●interviews and dialogues 
95
●roundtables 
●citizens’ juries 
96
●advisory committees 
●public forums 
97
●consultation on specific subjects or projects 
98
●open annual meetings 
93
 Ada Lovelace Institute (2020), ‘Rethinking data’, ​https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/our-work/rethinking-data  
94
 MIT Sloan Management Review (2005), ‘Managing stakeholder ambiguity’, 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/predicting-customer-choices-2  
95
 Royal Society (2017) ‘Public views of machine learning’, 
https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/machine-learning/publications/public-views-of-machine-learning-
ipsos-mori.pdf  
96
  Ada Lovelace Institute (2019), ‘The Ada Lovelace Institute supports Wellcome Trust to undertake citizen juries 
on fair data sharing in the NHS’, 
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/the-ada-lovelace-institute-kicks-off-citizen-jurie 
s-on-fair-data-sharing-in-the-nhs 
97
 Involve (2020), ‘21st century town meeting’, 
https://www.involve.org.uk/resources/methods/21st-century-town-meeting  
98
 UK Biobank (2020), ‘Public consultation’, ​https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/public-consultation  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  32 

 
 
 
For example, ROR has established a community advisory group composed of 
domain experts with whom they convene regular stakeholder prioritisation sessions. 
A steering group with experts and leaders from non-profit and academic institutions 
brings a wealth of expertise to ROR, lending it a sense of authority and trust. 
 
The following are occasions when two-way engagement is particularly appropriate to 
aligning trustworthiness and trust. 
Provide opportunities to re-evaluate following 
new information 
A data institution’s circumstances can change such that the foundations on which 
trust was built may shift. The trigger for change can be internal, for example, staffing 
or business models change; or caused by external forces, for example, new 
information comes to light, or regulations change. 
 
In seeking to evolve, scale and adapt to changing circumstances, however, it is 
important that data institutions assess whether they will be changing in ways that will 
upset or alienate members of their current stakeholders, community or ecosystem.  
 
For example, as a data institution grows and evolves, it may need to evolve its 
business model, possibly by offering new services or by welcoming new data 
contributors, users or decision makers to the ecosystem.  
 
HESA described to us how its business model has adjusted over time. It wanted to 
move away from commercialisation of data resources towards commercialisation 
based on expertise, such as data analysis and data visualisation. Its board of 
directors has always been careful to ensure that HESA’s commercial activities are not 
in conflict (or perceived by stakeholders to be in conflict) with HESA’s core functions. 
 
The ODI’s Data Ethics Canvas guidance recommends organisations regularly revisit 
their ethics assessment, for example, quarterly, or at project milestones. Similarly, if 
the conditions under which trust was originally given change, stakeholders and those 
affected by the use of data should be given the opportunity to review new information 
and re-evaluate any agreements they have entered into. 
Stakeholders’ views can change 
As a data institution grows, the community around it is likely to grow as well, and the 
needs, motives and expectations of that community are almost certain to evolve. 
 
Engagement can help a data institution identify any changes in public perception or 
changes in how trustworthiness and trust is aligned, giving the data institution the 
opportunity to make any necessary changes. 
 
For example, OpenStreetMap has corporate sponsors who provide funding and are 
increasingly involved in the project by contributing data, open source code and other 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  33 

 
 
resources. Their contributions represent their evolving sense of what is important to 
the project. These contributions help make the project more sustainable, but have 
raised concerns from the existing community about the ease with which those 
organisations could shape the future of the project. 
Data institutions as centres of debate 
The Ada Lovelace Institute observes: “The failure on the part of policy and industry 
organisations to open up the conversation to the wider public has moved the current 
discourse on data out of step with people’s expectations and attitudes.” This 
misalignment is fertile ground for the breakdown of trust. 
 
Previous ODI commissioned research found that data institutions could play a role 
99
in defending the interests of parties who:  
 
●cannot negotiate effectively because they are too dispersed, for example, the 
public 
●lack sufficient information about other parties’ incentives 
●are invested in the social and non-financial benefits. 
 
Data institutions could be a centre for debate: bringing together and enabling data 
scientists, data subjects and other stakeholders to interact, debate and refresh 
mutual understanding of what constitutes trustworthy behaviour. 
100
  
99
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: how decisions are made about data sharing’, 
https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-decision-making-report  
100
 O’Hara K (2019), ‘Data trusts: ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy data stewardship’, 
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/428276  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  34 

 
 
Conclusion and next 
steps 
This report summarises an initial exploratory study to help understand the factors that 
contribute to the creation of trustworthy data institutions. 
 
Data institutions are a relatively new type of organisation, and it is important that they 
are designed and operated in a trustworthy way, such that they establish and 
maintain the trust of their stakeholders.  
 
Adopting the language and concepts of formalised trust frameworks can help us 
understand the evolving ecosystem of trust around a data institution. A trust 
framework can also be used to understand the rules governing the activities of data 
institutions, and to organise our knowledge of the many mechanisms which they and 
others can use to either assess trustworthiness, or try to demonstrate it to create 
richer and more resilient networks of trust. 
 
Trust can be conferred to data institutions by third parties. By providing audit and 
certification, already-trusted members of the data ecosystem can help bolster trust in 
new data institutions, as earlier research into certification for data trusts suggests. 
101
 
Mapping these mechanisms reveals where there are gaps: trust is often undermined 
when there is a failure to communicate around change; and there is only so much 
kitemarks and principles can help in those cases. Most importantly, our work has 
highlighted how trust is dynamic: it can only be built over time, through 
demonstration of trustworthiness, and honest, open engagement across the 
ecosystem.  
 
To conclude, we identify some areas for further research and provide some initial 
recommendations for those currently scoping, designing and running data 
institutions. 
Areas for further research 
We plan to apply the framework introduced in this report to support further analysis 
of the ways data institutions ensure their trustworthiness and help others decide to 
trust them.  
 
There are several areas that merit further work, including: 
 
●Developing a more comprehensive review of the mechanisms adopted by 
different types of data institutions across sectors, and, in particular, exploring 
some who have suffered from breakdowns of trust. 
101
 Oxford Insights (2019), ‘Exploring data trust certifications’, 
https://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Report_-Exploring-Data-Trust-Certification.pdf  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  35 

 
 
●Further work to understand whether a combination of trust mechanisms 
would create an effective certification programme, and to understand how 
such a programme would affect the ecosystem of trust. 
●Developing and testing practical tools, for example, a canvas, using the trust 
framework as a basis to help support data institutions in developing 
trustworthy practices and aligning understanding. 
Suggestions for those scoping, designing and 
running data institutions 
While our exploratory research was not intended to produce a comprehensive survey 
of the many data institutions that exist across sectors, through our desk research and 
interviews we have identified some common issues and challenges in aligning 
trustworthiness and trust. 
 
Based on those insights, we offer some initial suggestions for those currently 
scoping, designing and running data institutions, to help them navigate 
trustworthiness and trust. 
 
Being trustworthy: reliably deliver on promises 
 
●Define explicit expectations and boundaries. ​Everything a data institution 
does should be constrained by its context – its purpose – to benefit some 
audiences and not cause harm through its actions. It should understand its 
role in the ecosystem: the relationships and dynamics in which it operates, 
including data flow and funding that could affect its purpose. It should 
understand its own abilities, limitations and where it should cooperate, and it 
shouldn’t overstep those boundaries. 
●Surface implicit expectations.​ Some expectations of a data institution will 
be implicit. Seek to understand the expectations of all those who have an 
interest in the operation: from regulators and direct stakeholders, to those 
who may be affected by using the data being stewarded. 
●Implement trustworthy practices.​ Follow the rules set by the data 
institution itself, and by its environment. Practise ethical design with special 
consideration to any implicit expectations. Establish an organisational 
structure, governance practices and organisational processes that are 
aligned with the declared values and principles, and that enable the people in 
the organisation to deliver on expectations. Hire employees with the right 
skills. Be fearlessly honest. 
 
Building and sustaining trust: close the perception gap 
 
●Demonstrate​ that the data institution has implemented trustworthy 
practices. 
●Communicate​ the data institution’s own expectations and boundaries 
clearly. 
●Engage people with empathy.​ Build mutually beneficial relationships. 
Understand how the data institution and its employees are perceived. 
Internalise the understanding gained in surfacing implicit expectations. Meet 
people where they are. Use language they understand. Demonstrate trust in 
the data institution’s stakeholders. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  36 

 
 
●Adapt and evolve collaboratively.​ Circumstances change and new 
information comes to light, and organisations need to adapt – but trust that 
was placed in the data institution in one set of circumstances may or may not 
endure in a new set. Explain changes to stakeholders and give them the 
opportunity to re-establish trust on new terms. Open up the data institution’s 
processes to influence and evolve together. 
 
We plan to apply these recommendations as we continue to work with a range of 
organisations that are establishing new data institutions. As our research and 
practical work continues, we will revisit, revise and expand these recommendations.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  37 

 
 
Appendix A: 
Methodology 
To inform this exploratory research project, we conducted broad desk research into 
concepts of trustworthiness relevant to the context of data institutions. We then 
defined a set of criteria to select different types of data institutions we would look at 
in more details. We conducted desk research about these institutions and, where 
possible, interviewed representatives of the data institutions.  
 
The brief timeframe of this research resulted in several limitations, including:  
 
1.Limited number of interviews. 
2.Potential sector bias – our desk research has been informed significantly by 
our prior knowledge of specific institutions. 
3.Focus on one trust framework. 
Research questions 
Main research question 
What mechanisms exist to assess (and verify) the trustworthiness of people, products 
and institutions, and which ones may be relevant in the context of data institutions? 
 
Supplementary research questions: 
 
1.What laws and regulation currently affect data institutions? 
2.What mechanisms do organisations use to prove their trustworthiness? 
3.Which groups of people or organisations do the data institutions aim to prove 
their trustworthiness to? 
Desk research 
Our desk research covered academic and professional literature on trust and 
trustworthiness, accountability, certification and accreditation, and data governance 
models. We also reviewed and built on our earlier research on data trusts and data 
institutions. 
Interviews 
We complemented the information gathered through desk research with interviews 
with representatives of data institutions. We interviewed representatives from five 
organisations covering some of the following criteria: 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  38 

 
 
 
1.Type of data institution:  
a.Organisations that steward data on behalf of a community 
b.Organisations that steward digital resources or a platform on behalf 
of a community 
c.Organisations that steward a physical resource on behalf of a 
community or set of stakeholders 
2.Life stage of the data institution:  
a.Organisations in scoping or co-design stage  
b.Organisations that are operational but relatively young  
c.Well-established or ‘successful’ institutions  
d.Organisations that tried to set up a data institution but could not 
overcome the challenges 
 
We interviewed representatives from the following data institutions:  
 
●Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA): an official body which 
102
collects, analyses and publishes data about higher education in the UK. Its 
products are used by researchers and policymakers for transparency, 
retaining public trust and decision making.  
●Research Organization Registry (ROR): a community-led project working 
103
to produce a unique, open, usable and sustainable identifier for every 
research organisation in the world. 
●HiLo Maritime Risk Management: a not-for-profit joint industry initiative 
104
providing analysis of shipping data to make the industry safer. Shipping 
companies share safety-related data from vessels, HiLo runs it through a risk 
algorithm and shares insights with the companies.  
●OpenCorporates: the world’s largest open database of information about 
105
companies. All of the data on OpenCorporates comes from primary public 
sources, and is used by individuals, journalists, non-governmental 
organisations and companies.  
●MusicBrainz: a project to create a collaborative database about artists, 
106
songs and albums. Any user can contribute and release the music metadata 
under open licences. 
107
 
The questions asked during the one-hour interviews covered themes related to 
sustainability and trustworthiness, specifically: 
108
 
●Revenue streams 
●What sustainability looks like 
●Alignment of business models with data institutions’ core goals 
●Mechanisms for ensuring trustworthiness 
○Laws or regulations that help prove or improve trustworthiness 
○Used or planned to use mechanisms to prove trustworthiness  
○Mechanisms for redress if trust is broken 
○Ways of demonstrating trustworthiness to different groups of people.  
102
 Higher Education Statistics Agency (n.d.), ​https://www.hesa.ac.uk/  
103
 Research Organization Registry (n.d.), ​https://ror.org/  
104
 HiLo Maritime Risk Management (n.d.), ​https://hilomrm.com/  
105
 OpenCorporates (n.d.), ​https://opencorporates.com/  
106
 MusicBrainz (n.d.), ​https://musicbrainz.org/  
107
 MusicBrainz (n.d.), ‘About: Data license’ ​https://musicbrainz.org/doc/About/Data_License  
108
 ​Open Data Institute (2020), R&D: Sustainable data institutions, 
https://theodi.org/project/sustainable-data-institutions 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  39 

 
 
Appendix B: Map of trust 
mechanisms 
This appendix presents a map of mechanisms that can be used or called upon by data institutions 
or others in their ecosystem. The table below presents those mechanisms mapped against the 
element of trust in the framework in the section ​‘A framework for trust’​, with columns mapping the 
ways trust can break down presented in the section ‘​How trust breaks down​’.  
 
The map is not intended to be comprehensive, but indicative of the kind of mechanisms 
considered during our research. 
 
 Avoid misrepresentation  Avoid misunderstanding  Avoid being unable to 
determine 
Communicate 
changes 
Ability ●Exams 
●Interviews 
●Performance monitoring 
●Audit 
●Certification 
●Professional certification 
●Accreditation 
●Oversight eg regulatory  
●Peer review 
●Quality standards  
eg ISO-9000 
●Exams 
●Interviews 
●Performance 
monitoring 
●Audit 
●Certification 
●Training 
●Quality standards  
eg ISO-9000 
●Privacy technologies 
 
Willingness ●Interviews  ●Principles 
●Codes of ethics 
●Codes of conduct 
 
Motivation   ●Penalties 
●Redress 
●Values 
 
Context  ●Contracts 
●T&Cs 
●Licences 
●Data sharing  
agreements 
●Citizens’ juries 
 ●Re-issuing 
T&Cs 
Behaviour ●Data access  
panels 
●Audit 
●Review boards 
●Minutes of  
Meetings 
●Certification 
 
●Laws 
●Regulation 
●Contracts 
●T&Cs 
●Licences 
●Sharing agreements 
●Data standards 
●Ethics assessments 
●Citizens’ juries 
●Audit 
●Data standards 
●Principles 
●Codes of ethics 
●Codes of conduct 
●Kitemarks 
●Re-issuing 
T&Cs 
Audience ●Financial reporting 
●Decision logs 
●Contracts 
●T&Cs 
●Licences 
●Register of interests 
●Ecosystem map 
●Empathy map 
 ●Re-issuing 
T&Cs 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning trustworthy data institutions  40 