

1

Contents
Contents2
About3
Executive summary4
Background6
Methods7
Aims and questions7
The data8
Data sources8
Data limitations10
Data sharing12
Findings13
Impact on teachers’ working lives13
Background13
Existing data13
Teachers’ experiences: survey findings16
Teachers’ estimates of learning loss20
Background20
Existing data20
Estimates of learning loss: survey findings22
Conclusions from the survey24
Data gaps25
Representativeness25
Data inclusion25
How well do respondents represent the teaching workforce?26
Data quality26
Granularity of data categories26
Timeliness of data27
Challenges to geographical matching27
Data infrastructure27
Data use and communication27
Teacher workload and retention28
Conclusion29
Technical Appendix30
Bibliography32
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic2

About
This report has been researched and produced by theOpen Data Institute (ODI),
and published in March 2021.
The report’s lead author is Miranda Voss. The researchfor this project was carried
out by the ODI, in collaboration with two partners:Mime, responsible for the data
sourcing, analysis and publication; andAllegory,a strategic communication
agency that has worked with the ODI for eight yearsand is responsible for the
research project management and communications.
We would like to thank the ODI’s Louise Burke, Mahlet(Milly) Zimeta, Jeni
Tennison and Roger Hampson for their guidance andsupport, Ellen Goodman for
project management, and Jo Dobie for copyediting.We would also like to thank
Emma Thwaites, Charlotte McLeod (Project Lead), AlexVryzakis and Kristin
Hadland from Allegory; Steve Preston, Joe Miller,Phil Rossiter, Oli Cheng and
Lucy Thomas from Mime; and Patrick Roach, Chris Weavers,Fred Grinrod and
Sarah Moran from the teaching unionNASUWT.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic3

Executive summary
This report was written in March 2021, at a time whenUK schools were beginning
to reopen fully for the second time during the coronavirus(Covid-19) pandemic.
There were already indications of significant lossesto children’s learning and
well-being, but little information on where the losseswould be concentrated, and
where additional resources were most needed. Therewas also very little data
about the experiences of teachers during the pandemic;an under-researched area
during compulsory school closures, but one that isparticularly important to
understand. About 10% of the teaching workforce leavesthe profession each year
and this ‘teacher wastage’ is likely to be particularlyproblematic at a time when
we need a stable, motivated workforce as childrenrecover from the effects of the
pandemic.
For this report, one of the major UK teachers’ unions,the NASUWT, made data
from a large longitudinal survey of its members availableto the ODI. In the
NASUWT’s 2021 ‘Big Question’ survey, additional questionsrelating to teaching
during the pandemic were added. Some 2021 responseswere compared with the
2019 and 2020 surveys to identify trends. Data fromthis survey was combined
with other open and publicly available data by Mime,an educational data
consultancy, before being anonymised, aggregated andmade available for
exploration throughan interactive tool.
In this report we outline the key findings from thiscombined dataset, looking
specifically at the experiences of teachers duringthe pandemic. We find that
about half of teachers were required to take on adual teaching role: providing
classroom supervision to those children still attendingschool, and providing
remote learning to others. Many teachers were unpreparedfor online learning,
particularly older teachers and special educationteachers. Most teachers reported
that their workload had increased significantly inthe previous 12 months and we
explore the reasons for that here. Despite the reportedincrease in workload and
levels of stress, fewer teachers were consideringleaving the profession when
compared with surveys from previous years.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic4

When asked for their estimates of learning loss intheir classes, 59% of teachers
who responded felt that at least half of their classhad lost ground educationally in
the previous 12 months. Losses were estimated to beparticularly substantial in
primary schools and in schools in the most economicallydeprived areas. When
asked about factors determining children’s engagementwith online learning,
teachers identified parental support as the most important.
Although there is a large volume of open and publiclyavailable data on the
performance of schools and children, there is verylittle open data that captures
the professional views and experiences of teachers.We believe this survey offers
valuable insight into the effects of the pandemicon teaching and learning, and the
conditions necessary for recovery. As such, open datalike this can usefully inform
strategies at this early stage in pandemic recovery.We hope that the open
publication of this dataset will encourage other organisationsto open and share
the data they hold as well, to support the pandemicresponse and aid education
research and policy making.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic5

Background
The ODI’s report ‘Data about children’s lives in thepandemic’, published in
November 2020,
1
explored the experiences of parents,teachers and children
during homeschooling, using a variety of data sources,and asked how better data
infrastructure could provide real-time decision-makingsupport to those involved in
the education and well-being of children. It highlightedthe additional pastoral
roles taken on by teachers during the pandemic, sociallypatterned educational
attainment gaps, and rises in rates of referral toBarnardo’s children’s support
services, which were mostly driven by mental healthand emotional concerns.
Raised levels of stress and anxiety in teachers werealso noted.
The report underlined the need for repeated data collectionin order to highlight
the ‘changing needs of different groups of children,families and teachers within
the current period of uncertainty’. The data usedin this follow-up report is taken
from a survey of the members of a large teachers’union, the NASUWT. The survey
was carried out in March 2021, at a time when thesecond wave of the Covid-19
pandemic was receding and plans were being made toreopen schools to all
pupils. This was an opportune time to examine teachers’experiences of work
during the pandemic, their assessment of children’slearning losses and their
priorities for full school reopening. This will informaction by policymakers and
teacher and child support organisations, both duringthe resumption of school life
and during any future disruption to it.
In this report we outline the results of the NASUWTsurvey of members in England.
Following an assessment of data quality, includingrecognition of its limitations, we
present summaries of teachers’ professional livesduring the pandemic, including
changes in workload and priorities for school reopening.We combine teachers’
opinions with contextual data from a variety of opendatasets to assess which
schools and sectors are likely to have experiencedthe worst learning losses. The
results of the survey support other published work,reviewed later in this report,
indicating that the impact of partial school closureson children’s learning and their
well-being varies between communities. Schools, particularlyin the state sector,
play an important role in levelling up opportunitiesacross communities and there
is a very real risk that the loss of this levelling-upfunction for a year will worsen
existing inequalities in our country.
1
ODI (2020), ‘Data about children’s lives in the pandemic’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic6

Methods
Aims and questions
In this report we explore how data can shed lighton the impact of the pandemic
on school education, both on the teaching workforceand on teachers’
perceptions of the learning and well-being of children.We use survey responses
and open data specifically to look at:
i) The impact of the pandemic on teachers’ workinglives
●
The teaching roles they took on
●
Their preparedness for remote teaching
●
The change in workload
●
The likely influence of these experiences on workforceretention
●
Their priorities and concerns about the reopeningof schools
ii) Teachers’ estimates of learning losses in theirpupils
●
The groups of children likely to have experiencedthe greatest learning losses
from partial school closures
●
Teachers’ understanding of the reasons behind lackof engagement with
online teaching
iii) How open data can be used to support policy making
●
The current gaps in data infrastructure that limitevidence-informed policy
making in this area
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic7

The data
Data sources
This report combines data from several sources. Westart each of the two
‘Findings’ sections (impact on teachers’ working livesand teachers’ estimates of
learning loss) with a short review of relevant, current,published literature. The
primary data source used in this report was the annual‘Big Question’ survey by
the teachers’ union NASUWT. The ‘Big Question’ surveyis a longitudinal survey
that has been sent to NASUWT members each year since2011. For the 2021
survey, we added additional questions related to teachingduring the pandemic.
We were also able to compare some responses with datafrom the 2019 and 2020
surveys to identify trends.
The survey was sent to NASUWT members in all fourUK nations, the Channel
Islands and Gibraltar, although this interim reportonly examines the data from
England. This is because education is managed differentlyacross the four nations,
and the contextual data we matched to was often onlyavailable for England.
Unions are understandably cautious about sharing informationsubmitted by their
members, but, in the context of the pandemic, theNASUWT leadership decided
that, as long as suitable safeguards to privacy andsecurity were in place, data
created by its members could usefully inform solutionsand policy making in the
education sector. The ODI hopes that this initiativewill encourage other
organisations that traditionally keep their data closedto share it in a secure way
when it could inform public decision making.
The survey data allowed us to examine responses bythe type of school that
teachers worked in, and by teacher age and gender.Other non-personal, public
data was taken from the sources listed in Table 1and geographically matched with
the postcode stem of schools.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic8

Data categoryDatasetGeographical
level
SourceLinkDate data
published
Licence
ConnectivityResidential households
unable to access 30Mbps
OA*Ofcomwww.ofcom.org.uk/research-and-data/multi-sector-
research/infrastructure-research/connected-nations
-2020/data-downloads
2020Ofcom terms
of use (open)
EconomyIncome deprivation affecting
children
LSOA*Ministry of
Housing,
Communities
and Local
Government
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/english-i
ndices-of-deprivation-2019
September
2019
OGL (open)**
Universal credit and
jobseeker’s allowance
claimants
LSOA*Office for
National
Statistics
https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/datasets/ucjsaJanuary
2021
OGL (open)
Working 49 hours or more
per week
OA*Census 2011https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/census/2011/ks604e
w
2011OGL (open)
HealthCovid-19 infection rateMSOA*UK Governmenthttps://coronavirus.data.gov.uk/details/downloadDaily updateOGL (open)
DemographicsOvercrowded householdsOA*Census 2011www.nomisweb.co.uk/census/2011/qs412ew2011OGL (open)
Lone parent householdsOA*Census 2011https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/census/2011/ks107u
k
2011OGL (open)
Teacher workforceNational
(England)
Department for
Education
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/school-w
orkforce-in-england-november-2019
November
2019
OGL (open)
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic9

Table 1:Additional sources of open data used in thisreport
*OA, LSOA and MSOA refer to output area, lower superoutput area and medium
super output area, respectively. These are progressivelylarger geographical units
of census data. For further information, see:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/methodology/geography/ukgeographies/censusgeograph
y
**OGL refers to an Open Government Licence
Data limitations
In any research study there are limitations to thedata, and it is important to be
aware of these in order to interpret the results accurately.
1.    The response rate was low. Of the 250,534 teachersin England who are
members of NASUWT and were invited to take part inthe survey, just 4,490
completed the survey in the two-week window allowedfor data collection for
this report.
In order to determine how representative the datais of the overall teaching
workforce, we compared the profile of survey respondentswith the profile of
the teaching workforce in English state schools andthe membership of the
NASUWT (Table 2), using data from the most recentschool workforce in
Englanddataset (from November 2019). The survey resultswere then
weighted for these characteristics so that the datawas more representative of
the overall teaching workforce (seeTechnical Appendix).
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic10

Table 2:Demographic profile of survey participantscompared with the teaching
workforce in English state schools.
2.  Teachers are in a strong position to give an opinionabout learning losses and the
factors leading to poor engagement in their pupils.However, it is important to
recognise that all opinions are subjective and maycome with assumptions. Despite
this, we argue that teachers’ professional opinionsabout their classes’ learning
contribute important and useful data, given that thealternative is extensive, in-depth
testing of children. While testing children directlymay improve the data, concern
has been raised about the effect of early reintroductionof statutory testing on
children’s well-being, after a year when many willhave lost ground educationally
and socially.
2
3.  We anonymised teachers’ responses and aggregatedthem at the level of school
postcode stem. We then combined these responses withother data from their
school’s postcode in order to understand learninglosses in the context of social
and economic factors. However, the school postcodeis only an approximation of
the residential postcodes of the children who attendthat school, as the catchment
area may extend across several postcodes. It is difficultto mitigate against this and
2
Institute of Education (2020), ‘Responding to COVID-19,Briefing Note 3: Resetting educational
priorities in challenging times’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic11

the approximation needs to be borne in mind when interpreting the results.
In addition, postcode stems do not exactly match thecensus areas they are
mapped to.
4.  Our analysis of children’s learning losses isat school postcode level, not at the level
of individual children. This means that conclusionscannot be drawn about the
losses and needs of individual children. Similarly,our analysis of teacher experience
is drawn from analysis of a sample, when even withinschools, teachers’
experiences may vary dramatically. Aggregate datacan be used to understand
trends and patterns, but cannot be used to make predictionsat an individual level.
Data sharing
Mime data consultancy has created an interactive toolto allow others to explore
the findings. This tool can be used for subgroup analysis,but it should be noted
that groupings containing less than 20 individualresponses have been removed in
order to preserve confidentiality. The tool is availableat:
https://theodi.org/article/data-on-teachers-lives-during-the-pandemic-report
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic12

Findings
Impact on teachers’ working lives
Background
Over the past year, there has been a lot of attentionpaid to the impact of school
closures due to the pandemic on children, and whetherschool closure is an
effective public health tactic to prevent the spreadof disease.
3
Less attention has
been paid to the impact on the teaching workforce.This is an important gap, given
the role of teachers in mitigating the impact of schoolclosures on children’s
well-being and learning.
4
Existing data
Retaining teachers is a problem in the UK. Around10% of the workforce leaves
the state sector every year and the pupil:teacherratio has been increasing since
2011.
5
The nature of the workload has been implicated.Performance
management, loss of autonomy and limited opportunitiesfor both professional
development and participation in decision-making haveall been identified as
causes of ‘teacher wastage’.
6
The NHS is another areaof the public sector that
has experienced a growth in performance managementin recent decades, and
data on retention of NHS staff has noted similar concerns,and highlighted that
salary increases only partially mitigate the impacton workforce retention.
7
Data that monitors trends in teachers’ motivationand engagement with their work
could play a role in assessing the impact of policydecisions on workforce
retention. Publishing the data from a large annualsurvey allows access to this
data, with the consent of participants, without theintrusion associated with
commercial workforce analytics that analyse employees’digital activities.
8
8
Social Sciences (2019),‘Big data and human resourcesmanagement: The rise of talent analytics’
7
BMJ Open (2020), ‘Relationship between labour forcesatisfaction, wages and retention within the UK
National Health Service: a systematic review of theliterature’
6
British Journal of Educational Studies (2020),‘Whatmotivates people to teach, and why do they
leave? Accountability, performativity and teacherretention’
5
House of Commons Library (2019), ‘Research Briefing:Teacher recruitment and retention in England’
4
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’
3
BMJ (2020), ‘Effect of school closures on mortalityfrom coronavirus disease 2019: old and new
predictions’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic13

Challenges of adapting to online teaching
Although the term ‘school closure’ is widely used,it is important to recognise that
schools have remained physically open to the childrenof key workers and
vulnerable children, and have continued providingeducation to all students. This
means that many teachers have had to provide remoteteaching for a large
proportion of their pupils, while continuing to provideclassroom teaching and
supervision for others. The almost overnight switchto online teaching for the
majority of pupils in March 2020 meant that teachers’preparation for it was
minimal. There was no national policy on the provisionof online teaching, and
schools were given freedom about how to implementremote learning, which
meant that skills and materials had to be developedrapidly.
9
Live online teaching
was constrained by concerns about child safety andunequal digital access, and
so many lessons had to be recorded as podcasts, whichcan be a time-consuming
process for teachers, requiring planning, scriptingand editing. Although online
teaching was challenging and teachers missed socialinteractions with pupils,
10
there was evidence of them finding ways to deliverremote learning even for highly
social subjects such as music,
11
and for many teachers,there was a sense that
they had learned new skills from the challenges posedby the pandemic.
12
Some
teachers were surprised to find that some of theirpupils thrived on home
schooling and they found some unexpected star learners.
13
Unfortunately, despite these efforts and some successstories, engagement with
online learning for most pupils has been problematic.A survey of teachers in May
2020 indicated that only 42% of pupils had submittedtheir most recent piece of set
work and 90% of teachers thought their pupils weredoing less work than normal.
14
Pastoral care
Several reports indicate that teachers’ primary concernduring school closures has
been with the welfare of their pupils, particularlyvulnerable pupils, rather than
educational issues.
15
Some dealt with this by deliveringfood parcels and learning
materials directly to children’s homes.
16
However,as the pandemic progressed,
teachers also became increasingly concerned aboutthe well-being of children
16
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’; PsyArXiv
(2020), ‘“We need clear directions, if we’re goingto move forward. It’s as simple as that”: Teachers’
narratives during partial school reopenings in theCOVID-19 pandemic’
15
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’; Human
Rights Watch (2020), ‘Children in England going hungrywith schools shut. Uneven UK approach for
Covid-19 doesn’t guarantee children’s right to food’;International Literacy Centre (2020), ‘Responding
to COVID-19, Briefing Note 3: Resetting educationalpriorities in challenging times’
14
National Foundation for Educational Research (2020),‘Pupil engagementin remote learning’
13
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’
12
PsyArXiv (2020), ‘'We need clear directions, if we’regoing to move forward. It’s as simple as that':
Teachers’ narratives during partial school reopeningsin the COVID-19 pandemic’
11
British Journal of Music Education (2020), ‘EditorialResearch: Music education in a time of
pandemic’
10
PsyArXiv (2020), ‘“We need clear directions, if we’regoing to move forward. It’s as simple as that”:
Teachers’ narratives during partial school reopeningsin the COVID-19 pandemic’
9
Technology, Pedagogy and Education (2020),
‘
The educationalresponse to Covid-19 across two
countries: a critical examination of initial digitalpedagogy adoption’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic14

who had not previously been identified as vulnerable and those who were clearly
losing ground academically.
17
Professional relationships and identity
Teachers’ relationships with pupils, parents and colleaguesare fundamental to
their sense of well-being, and good relationshipscan protect against burnout.
18
Social distancing rules during school closures havemeant less face-to-face
contact with colleagues as well as with children.To some extent, this could be
compensated for by virtual support, often using socialmedia.
19
However, some
teachers found social media problematic as the messagescould be quite
demoralising and made it difficult for teachers toseparate home and work life.
20
A strong sense of professional responsibility wasapparent as teachers and school
leaders took on additional roles in the pandemic,such as cleaning duties when schools
returned
21
and food deliveries when the government’svoucher scheme failed.
22
Changing attitudes over time
Early in the pandemic, some teachers reported feelinga sense of satisfaction that
they were able to rise to the challenge and were permittedto use their professional
judgement to teach and care as well as possible indifficult circumstances.
23
Most
of the low points described by a stratum of teachersafter the first six weeks of
lockdown related to uncertainty, particularly a feelingof rush and lack of clarity
when schools were first closed.
24
This feeling mayhave intensified later in the year,
when some teachers reported receiving confusing andcontradictory messages
about school reopening that prevented them from beingable to plan ahead.
25
A
need for clear guidance and better communication wasstrongly expressed by one
group of teachers.
26
26
ibid.
25
PsyArXiv (2020), “'We need clear directions, if we’regoing to move forward. It’s as simple as that”:
Teachers’ narratives during partial school reopeningsin the COVID-19 pandemic’
24
ibid.
23
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’
22
Human Rights Watch (2020), ‘Children in England goinghungry with schools shut. Uneven UK
approach for Covid-19 doesn’t guarantee children’sright to food’
21
PsyArXiv (2020), ‘“We need clear directions, if we’regoing to move forward. It’s as simple as that”:
Teachers’ narratives during partial school reopeningsin the COVID-19 pandemic’
20
ibid.
19
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’; PsyArXiv
(2020), ‘“We need clear directions, if we’re goingto move forward. It’s as simple as that”: Teachers’
narratives during partial school reopenings in theCOVID-19 pandemic’
18
Educational Review (2021), ‘Teacher job satisfaction:the importance of school working conditions
and teacher characteristics’; Teaching and TeacherEducation (2013), ‘Job satisfaction and
teacher-student relationships across the teachingcareer: Four case studies’
17
PsyArXiv (2020), ‘“We need clear directions, if we’re going to move forward. It’s as simple as that”:
Teachers’ narratives during partial school reopeningsin the COVID-19 pandemic’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic15

While there is evidence that teachers were willingand able, with very little notice,
to teach in an entirely different way and to fillthe chasm in pastoral care created
by school closures, these efforts have taken theirtoll: 62% of 7,000 teachers
responding to a survey in February 2021 reported feeling‘drained and mentally
exhausted’.
27
There was also concern expressed amongteachers that, at the end
of the pandemic, there will be a rapid return to schoolinspections and pupil
testing, pushing pupils too hard when their learningmay have deteriorated,
together with doubt about whether teachers’ viewswould be listened to.
28
The
publication of a large teachers’ survey gives thema voice with which to record
their experiences of teaching during school closuresand to express their views
about needs and priorities for post-pandemic recovery.We report some of the key
findings below.
Teachers’ experiences: survey findings
Teaching roles
Over half (52%) of the NASUWT ‘Big Question’ surveyrespondents said they had
a dual role during school closures, providing remoteteaching for some students
and continuing to provide classroom teaching and supervisionfor others; 42%
provided remote teaching only; and the rest eitherprovided classroom teaching
only (5%) or had been unable to teach during the pandemic(1%). The teachers’
working patterns varied with the age of the childrentaught: 89% of sixth form
college teachers were predominantly teaching online,but 71% of primary school
teachers were providing both face-to-face and onlineteaching. The high
proportion of primary school teachers providing bothtypes of teaching probably
reflects the need to provide classroom teaching andsupervision to the younger
children of key workers.
Preparation and support for online teaching
Of the teachers who had been delivering online learning,only 9% felt well
prepared for remote teaching. There was a clear agegradient, with 11% of
teachers under 25 feeling well prepared, comparedto only 7% of teachers aged
50 to 59. When asked if they felt well supported,19% of teachers aged under 25
and 13% of those aged 50 to 59 reported feeling wellsupported. Teachers over
the age of 60 were surprisingly positive about onlineteaching, with 12% feeling
well prepared and 20% well supported. Special educationteachers were less
likely to feel well prepared (3%) and well supported(10%). Overall, only 17% of
teachers were given training in dealing with pupils’online behaviour.
Teachers’ workload during the pandemic
The average weekly hours worked by full-time teacherswas 52 hours and 61% felt
that their workload had increased significantly duringthe pandemic. 81% also
reported an increase in stress over the previous 12months.
28
International Literacy Centre (2020), ‘Respondingto COVID-19, Briefing Note 3: Resetting
educational priorities in challenging times’
27
Times Educational Supplement (2020), ‘Exclusive:Exhausted teachers “pushed to the brink”’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic16

When asked what was contributing to the additionalworkload, 93% identified
remote teaching; 69% lesson planning; 64% administration;and 57% pastoral
care. Overall, 58% of teachers had spent more timedealing with parents; this was
particularly the case for primary school teachers(69%), special education
teachers (78%) and senior management (72%). Femaleteachers were more likely
than male teachers to identify pastoral care (60%vs 48%) and dealing with
parents (60% vs 54%) as taking more time than previously.
Table 3:Teaching during the pandemic.
View teachers’ working patterns during the pandemic,broken down by teacher
role, usingthe interactive tool.
Teachers’ challenges and priorities for the returnto full school opening
Teachers were asked to rank their greatest challengesduring school closures.
Dealing with the additional workload caused by onlineteaching was the highest
ranking challenge overall, followed by difficultiesin getting pupils to engage with
remote learning, and then the monitoring of children’swelfare.
When asked about their greatest concerns for schoolsreopening (Table 4), the risk
of Covid-19 spreading within schools was ranked highestoverall, followed by
pupils’ mental health and then the need for academiccatch-up. When the
rankings were compared across different school sectors,primary school and
special education teachers ranked mental health concernsat least as highly as
concerns about the spread of Covid-19.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic17

Table 4:Average ranking of teachers’ concerns aboutreturn to full school opening.
View average rankings of concerns, broken down byteacher role, usingthe
interactive tool. Lower numbers indicate higher ranking.
Teachers were also asked what they thought shouldbe in place before reopening
schools. The responses that had the highest percentagesof teachers agreeing
were guidance on pupil numbers (89%), followed byavailability of lateral flow
testing (89%) and vaccination for teachers (86%).
Changes in working conditions over time
Several questions in the NASUWT survey have been askedfor the past three
years, which allow us to monitor trends. Figures 1and 2 show how teachers’
perceptions of their working conditions have changedover time. Figure 1 shows
that, although stress has increased, in the past 12months there has been a
decline in the proportion of teachers consideringleaving the profession or their
job, and the proportion who felt their job satisfactionhad declined. This may be
reflective of an uncertain jobs market as a resultof the pandemic, or it may reflect
greater job satisfaction during the pandemic. To investigatethis further, we
examined 11 indicators of job satisfaction for whichthere was also data over three
years. These indicators are shown in Figures 2 and3. Figure 2 shows positive
sentiments about working and Figure 3 shows negativesentiments. It is striking
that negative sentiments trended down and the positivesentiments trended up.
In other words, despite the increase in work and stress,teachers were, on
average, enjoying their work more. This data suggeststhat increased professional
autonomy and a reduction in performance managementduring the pandemic may
have made teachers more likely to stay in the profession.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic18

Despite the reassuring trends, it should be notedthat the percentage of teachers
considering leaving the profession remains high, at55%. Likewise, the percentage
of teachers who believe that teaching salary and conditionsare competitive has
increased, but from only 7% to 15%.
Figure 1: Trends in teachers’ workload, stress andintention to leave the profession
since 2019
Figure 2: Trends in teachers’ positive sentimentsabout their work since 2019
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic19

Figure 3: Trends in teachers’ negative sentimentsabout their work since 2019
Teachers’ estimates of learning loss
Background
There is growing evidence about cumulative lossesof learning, and a reduction in
the physical and emotional health of all children,but particular concern that these
problems may be concentrated in children from low-incomehouseholds. Improved
understanding of the extent to which school closuresinfluence the life chances of
less well-off children could support informed policymaking around post-pandemic
recovery, and also inform decisions around futureschool closures. However, risks
are difficult to assess because schools’ ‘levelling-up’function operates across
several dimensions.
Existing data
School closures and emotional health
Reduced access to play and to friends may impair mood,and several surveys have
indicated a reduction in the mental health of childrenduring lockdown, and
particularly symptoms of depression.
29
The risk ofmental health problems in
children is socially patterned, and pre-pandemic ratesin the least well-off 20% of
households were reported to be four times that ofchildren in the most well-off
29
Archives of Disease in Childhood (2020), ‘Longitudinalincreases in childhood depression symptoms
during the COVID-19 lockdown’; Barnardo’s (2020),‘Briefing for MPs & Peers: Children’s mental health
and Covid-19’; Girlguiding (2020), ‘Early findingson the impact of Covid-19 on girls and young women’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic20

20%.
30
It is not yet clear whether this gap will widen further as a result of the
pandemic.
School closures and physical health
Physical health may also suffer because the structurednature of a school day
reduces behaviours that cause obesity. Children who have a tendency to obesity
put on weight and become less fit over the summerholidays as they take less
exercise, have more screen time and eat higher caloriefoods,
31
and there is concern
that the lockdown will worsen the current childhoodobesity epidemic.
32
Data from
the Bradford longitudinal study highlighted that pandemic-relatedsedentary
behaviour was patterned along ethnic lines: 34% ofwhite British, but only 23% of
children from other ethnicities had met guidelinesfor physical activity.
33
For other children, hunger is the problem, with 1.4million children in the UK
currently eligible for free school meals that werenot provided during school
closures.
34
Hunger is clearly related to social andeconomic factors. When a
voucher replacement scheme failed, it was reportedthat some schools and
teachers filled the gap and distributed food directlyto families.
35
Places to study and access to the internet
Material disadvantage also reduces access to onlinelearning opportunities, in
particular devices for accessing the internet, bandwidthand a quiet place to study.
36
A report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS)early in the pandemic confirmed this
gradient and reported that one in 10 primary schoolstudents and one in seven
secondary school students had either no device foraccessing the internet or relied
on a mobile phone, and that 10% of secondary studentsand more than 20% of
primary school students had no dedicated study space.
37
Any claim to having
‘internet access’ should be interpreted with caution,as for some children it meant a
parent’s mobile phone with very limited data allowance.
38
During the first lockdown,
teachers indicated that around 25% of their pupilshad inadequate access to the
internet.
39
These problems are compounded by the lossof public spaces such as
libraries that offer spaces to work in and wifi access;
40
resources that are particularly
40
The Oxfordshire Digital Inclusion Project (2020),
‘
Covid-19 is increasing digital inequality: We need
human connectivity to close the digital divide’
39
National Foundation for Educational Research (2020),‘Pupil engagementin remote learning’
38
British Journal of Educational Psychology (2020),‘"Like a rug had been pulled from under you”: The
impact of COVID-19 on teachers in England during thefirst six weeks of the UK lockdown’
37
ibid.
36
Institute for Fiscal Studies (2020), ‘Inequalitiesin children’s experiences of home learning duringthe
COVID-19 lockdown in England’
35
Human Rights Watch (2020), ‘Children in England goinghungry with schools shut. Uneven UK
approach for Covid-19 doesn’t guarantee children’sright to food’
34
UK Parliament (2020), ‘Free school meals’
33
BIHR COVID-19 Scientific Advisory Group (2021), ‘Children’sphysical activity during Covid-19 from
the Born in Bradford Cohort’
32
Paediatrics and Child Health (Oxford) (2020), ‘Theindirect impact of COVID-19 on child health’
31
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition andPhysical Activity (2017), ‘Understanding differences
between summer vs. school obesogenic behaviors ofchildren: the structured days hypothesis’
30
Centre for Mental Health (2015), ‘Children of thenew century: Mental health findings from the
Millenium Cohort Study’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic21

important to those less digitally well off.
41
However, even when children have access to good bandwidthand devices for
accessing the internet, a digital divide may resultfrom differences in the way the
internet is used. ‘Meaningful internet use’, or theway in which the internet is used
to ‘mobilise information resources, to be able toaddress a range of everyday
goals and concerns’
42
follows other patterns of disadvantage
43
.The IFS report also
noted a gradient between household income and boththe amount of time spent
studying and the types of resources used, which putlow-income children at a
disadvantage.
44
Unequal ‘learning slides’ when schools close
There are also more subtle disproportionate impactsfor the less well-off of
missing school. Children’s opportunities to learnoutside of school are limited by
their home environment, and a ‘summer slide’ is recognised,where the learning of
disadvantaged children tends to stagnate during summerholidays, while better-off
children continue to learn.
45
In the United States, the summer slide is thought to
account for almost two thirds of the achievement gapbetween income groups.
46
Taken together, the data strongly indicates that childrenfrom some communities
are more vulnerable to school closures than others,and that several factors
contribute to this. Our combined dataset allows usto examine in which schools
and sectors learning losses are likely to be the greatest.
Estimates of learning loss: survey findings
Which children have experienced the greatest learninglosses?
Overall, 59% of teachers felt that at least half oftheir pupils had lost ground
academically over the previous 12 months. This wasparticularly the case with
younger children: 63% of primary school teachers feltat least half the class had
lost ground, compared to only 43% of sixth form teachers.
There was also a gradient with the deprivation indexof the school postcode:
estimates were 70% for schools in the most deprivedpostcodes, compared to
48% for the least deprived. Teachers’ estimates oflearning loss, lack of
completion of set work and underlying reasons forpoor engagement are
compared with demographic data from the school’s postcodein Figure 4.
46
ibid.
45
Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk(JESPAR) (2012),‘Counteracting summer slide:
social capital resources within socioeconomicallydisadvantaged families’
44
Institute for Fiscal Studies (2020), ‘Inequalitiesin children’s experiences of home learning duringthe
COVID-19 lockdown in England’
43
Educational Review (2012), ‘Learning online? Educationalinternet use and participation in adult
learning, 2002 to 2010’
42
Journal of Communication (2016), ‘Toward meaningfulconnectivity: Using multilevel communication
research to reframe digital inequality’
41
Telematics and Informatics (2012), ‘Digital inequalities and implications for social inequalities: A
study of Internet penetration amongst university studentsin South Africa’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic22

Table 5:Learning loss and engagement with remotelearning.
View results by school demographics usingthe interactivetool.
Reasons for lack of engagement
Overall, 65% of teachers felt that their class wasengaging less well with remote
learning than with face-to-face learning. Teachersreported that 55% of children
had handed in their last piece of work and, whilethis was similar across age
groups in mainstream education, it was noticeablylower (46%) in special
education classes.
Teachers were asked to rate the contribution of variousfactors to engagement
with remote learning as having a ‘high’ or a ‘low’impact on ‘a few’ or ‘many’
pupils. Parental support was identified as the mostimportant factor: 74% of
teachers ranked a lack of parental support as highimpact on at least a few pupils.
This was lower in independent schools (53%) than instate schools (76%), and
also varied by deprivation index, with estimates of79% for schools in the most
deprived postcodes, compared to 69% in the least deprivedpostcodes. Data on
perceived causes of poor engagement in schools inthe most deprived postcodes
is shown in Figure 3 and compared with overall findings.The smallest difference
between schools in the most deprived postcodes andthe average is the level of
parental engagement.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic23

Figure 4: Teachers’ estimates of the frequency andimportance of factors
contributing to poor engagement with remote learningin schools in the most
deprived postcodes. Average findings for all schoolpostcodes are represented by
an orange line.
Conclusions from the survey
During the partial school closures of 2020-21, abouthalf of all teachers took on a
dual role, providing classroom as well as remote teaching.Primary school teachers
were particularly likely to have taken on this dualrole, probably because of their role
in providing day care for the children of key workersand vulnerable children.
Over 60% of teachers felt that their workload hadincreased over the past 12
months and the average hours of work for full-timeteachers was just over 52 per
week. Despite this, a smaller proportion of teacherssaid they were planning to
leave the profession than in the previous two years,and indicators suggest that
this was related to more professional autonomy duringthe pandemic.
Teachers’ estimate of learning losses indicated thatthese are likely to be
substantial in all groups of children, but there wasparticular concern from primary
school teachers, and teachers from schools in moredeprived postcodes. A lack of
support from a parent or other adult was the mostcommonly identified factor
associated with poor engagement with online learning.Learning loss is linked to a
number of social and economic measures at the schoolpostcode level.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic24

Data gaps
The data reported in this study has highlighted whatwe can tell about how
teachers’ working lives changed during the pandemicand in which groups of
children they are most concerned about learning loss.This report can be seen as
an illustration of how open data can inform researchand policy making, but it is
important to assess the availability, reliability,fairness and transparency of the
available public data. We need to ask whether thedata we have is the data we
need to answer the questions we have.
Representativeness
Data inclusion
When data is used for decision making, it is importantto consider whether it fairly
represents the groups it is thought to describe, orwhether some groups have
been excluded. For example, Gypsy and Traveller communitieswere included as
an ethnic category in the UK census for the firsttime in 2011, meaning that before
then, their health and social indicators had not beenused in census-driven
decision making.
47
Groups need to be visible in thedata in order to be represented
by it, and it could be argued that, by assessing socialdata at the level of a
school’s postcode stem, we have averaged out the needsof distinct groups of
children and denied them representation. However,the advantage of representing
distinct groups and categories of children needs tobe balanced against the risk of
assigning individuals to more granular categoriesand making assumptions about
them that are discriminatory.
In this report we have deliberately not attemptedto identify distinct groupings that
could be used to characterise a particular child.Instead, we highlight the
concentration of educational losses in primary schools,in special education and in
schools located in deprived postcodes, which may needadditional resources as
post-pandemic recovery unfolds.
How well do respondents represent the teaching workforce?
The low response rate of the survey was not unusual,but it does raise questions
about the representativeness of the data. We triedto mitigate this by weighting
responses by demographic factors. However, the possibilityalways remains that
teachers who responded to the survey differed systematicallyfrom those who did
not. It might be argued, for example, that teacherswould be more likely to
respond to the survey if they had had a particularlypositive experience during the
pandemic or, alternatively, if they had an axe togrind. Responses may also be
47
UK Parliament (2019), ‘Research briefing: Gypsiesand Travellers’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic25

influenced by the perceived purposes of a survey which, in this case, could be
seen as a tool for lobbying and improving employmentconditions.
It is difficult to mitigate against these risks inthe present report, but it does raise a
broader question about public perceptions of datause and willingness to
contribute data – something that is addressed furtherbelow.
Data quality
Granularity of data categories
Surveys that ask workers to rate their job satisfactionwithin limited response
categories are blunt instruments for assessing themood and motivation of the
workforce. Technically, it is possible to collectmore detailed information about
workers’ performance, engagement and motivation byscraping employees’
professional and personal communications and analysingthem using natural
language processing. While there has been a rise inthe use of commercial
workforce analytics that perform these functions inthe private sector,
48
the use of
this sort of digital surveillance is intrusive, maylead to discriminatory profiling of
individuals, and may itself change the behaviour itseeks to monitor.
A similar argument could be made about drawing conclusionsabout children’s
learning losses and the determinants of learning engagementfrom teachers’
opinions. More granular data about how individualchildren are learning online
could certainly be gained from analysing their performancein schoolwork, or even
clickstream data to see what material individual childrenare accessing and how
long they spend on it. However, we also have to bealert to the ethics and adverse
consequences of data collection itself – such as increasedtesting or invasions of
privacy – and how this might feed back into changesin behaviour, such as
teaching to the test or the use of mouse movers tosimulate activity. Data
collection should be minimised: it should be enoughto answer the questions we
have, rather than everything we could collect. Inthis context, we believe our
approach of using anonymised and aggregated data publishedas open data,
combined with other publicly available datasets, meetsconditions for appropriate
and useful granularity.
Timeliness of data
Some of our contextual data was taken from sourcesthat were not concurrent
with the survey. This is particularly the case fordata about communities that relies
on census data. This report was written in a censusyear, meaning that the most
recent published census data is 10 years old. Real-timeinformation about
communities is almost certainly available to thosecommercial entities that collect
48
Social Sciences (2019),‘Big data and human resourcesmanagement: The rise of talent analytics’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic26

personal digital data, but this is not made available for public use.
Challenges to geographical matching
One of the strengths of this report is the linkingof teachers’ views to contextual
data about their school’s community. However, thiscame with challenges. A
postcode stem was used to identify a school’s approximatelocation. A full
postcode would have been more precise, but would haveidentified individual
schools. Postcode stems were then mapped as well aspossible to census areas.
Direct matching would have been preferable, but itis unlikely that teachers would
know the lower super output areas of their schools.Common standards for
geographical mapping that are recognised by userswould make the analysis of
data from multiple sources more accurate.
Data infrastructure
Data use and communication
‘Data infrastructure’ consists of a combination ofdata assets, technology,
processes and organisations. The use of data to solveproblems and the
communication of that use to participants and thepublic is an important part of
data infrastructure,
49
and can create a sense of publicownership and control of
data. The ‘citizen science’ movement has been verysuccessful in mobilising
crowd-sourced data to monitor environmental issues,
50
indicating that there is an
appetite for contributing public data when it is seento be of value.
If workforce surveys are to be used to monitor teachers’professional opinions, it is
necessary to make the results as representative aspossible and so the low
response rate was a concern. Informal enquiries suggestedsome survey fatigue
among teachers, who have been asked to contributedata to several questionnaires
over the course of the year. It seems likely thatmany of those invited to participate
will have seen the survey as another gratuitous datacollection exercise and decided
not to take part. Participation in future surveysof this sort may be promoted if
teachers can see that their collective views and concernshave been noted and have
informed policy. This places an onus on those designingsurveys to ensure that the
data they collect is directed towards problem solving,and an onus on data users to
communicate this use to contributors.
Teacher workload and retention
Teacher retention is likely to be particularly importantas children recover from the
damage to their learning and well-being caused byschool closures. Teachers in
this survey indicated that their workload had increasedand they were working
50
Nature(2018), ‘No PhDs needed: how citizen scienceis transforming research’
49
Civil Service Quarterly (2019), ‘An interview withJohn Pullinger, former UK National Statistician’
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic27

over 50 hours per week on average. Data about workload is available from the
teacher workload surveythat was carried out in 2016and 2019, but there may be
an argument for repeating this survey more regularlyor incorporating some of its
measures into other tools, such as theschool workforcesurvey.
Data from the NASUWT survey indicated that substantiallearning losses are
probable across all groups, but that these are likelyto be concentrated in primary
schools and in schools in less well-off postcodes.It follows that teacher
recruitment and retention is particularly importantin those sectors and areas, and
should be monitored. Currently, teacher retentiondata is only available at a
national level. Making it openly available at thelevel of different sectors and
regions would increase the transparency of educationalmanagement and allow
civil society organisations and interested individualsto determine whether there
are areas where low teacher retention represents arisk to schooling and where
additional support may be needed.
Better data on teacher well-being is also requiredto monitor the impact of
education policies on teacher motivation and retention.We have a great deal of
information about the performance of children andschools, but the consequences
of this approach to performance management on theteaching workforce also
needs to be measured and critically assessed so thatbalanced decisions can be
made about education policy. Common metrics of teacherwell-being and job
satisfaction, and measurement of trends, are necessary.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic28

Conclusion
Researchers, policymakers and citizens who are interestedin education have
access to a great deal of data about the performanceof children and schools from
theeducation statistics service, and about teachernumbers and characteristics
from theschool workforce survey. What is missingis reliable, systematic data on
the well-being and professional views of teachers.
In this report we explored how open and publicly availabledata can be combined
and used to shed light on the impact of the pandemicon the working lives of
teachers and the learning and well-being of the childrenthey teach. The data
highlighted particular areas of concern regardingchildren’s learning losses, which
are likely to be more severe in primary schools andin schools in low income areas,
and the surprising finding that although teachershad to work harder and were
more stressed than usual, they felt more positiveabout their work and were less
likely to consider leaving the profession. We alsodiscussed the limitations of this
data, in particular the low response rate to the survey,and the difficulty matching
datasets based on geography.
Data is necessary for good public decision making,and the nature of that data
affects the quality of those decisions. Timely dataenables timely decisions and
action. Granular data – for example about differentareas or different school
settings – supports targeted interventions. Data frommultiple sources – including
that created by communities and professional bodiesto describe and evidence
their experience – helps to create a rich and nuancedpicture.
Opening data, and particularly that used for importantdecisions, supports
transparency and accountability around those decisions,and enables
policymakers, researchers and the public to understandand question them.
Open data can also help prioritise and support action,such as the provision and
targeting of support services by civil society andbusinesses.
But no data is perfect, and it is important to surfacehow it was collected and
processed, and recognise, as we have in this report,its limitations, so that it can
be critiqued and understood in context.
In education, as in many sectors, we are still farfrom having the data infrastructure
we need. Teachers are not alone in wanting their opinionsand experiences to be
taken into account when decisions are made about theirworking lives. The
pandemic has shown us the importance of timely datain a rapidly changing world,
and how much collective knowledge is held within institutionslike the NHS, or
already available to organisations like businesses,unions and civil society
organisations. Making data available, in privacy-protecting,timely and systematic
ways, means we can harness that collective knowledgefor the collective good.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic29

Technical Appendix
Survey data processing and cleaning methods
Data cleaning
A series of data cleaning processes were carried outon the raw survey data.
These included:
●
School postcode outcode or stem (for example SW4)– some respondents entered
full postcodes and others added characters or spaces,and where possible, these
were cleaned to provide a valid outcode. Overall,3,096 postcode outcodes were
identified and matched to external datasets (see below).
●
Education sector – some respondents did not tick whichsector of
education they teach in, but wrote something in the‘other’ box. These
were recategorised into one of the defined sectorswhere relevant. Due to
small numbers, teachers in sixth form colleges, furthereducation colleges
or higher education were combined into a ‘post-16’category. Where more
than one option was ticked, only the first was takento avoid double
counting respondents.
●
Ethnic group – some respondents did not select anyethnic group but
wrote one in the ‘other’ box. Where clear, these werereclassified as one of
the ethnic groups. Where more than one option wasticked, only the first
was taken to avoid double counting respondents.
●
Position – some respondents did not select a position(for example middle
manager) but wrote one in the ‘other’ box. Where clear,these were
reclassified as one of the defined positions. Dueto small numbers,
headteacher/deputy headteachers and senior managementteam
members were combined into a senior manager category.
●
Working pattern – some respondents did not selecta working pattern (for
example temporary part time) but wrote one in the‘other’ box. Where
clear, these were reclassified as one of the definedgroups. Where more
than one option was ticked, only the first was takento avoid double
counting respondents.
●
Invalid responses – for two questions (Q15 and Q25) we excluded values
that were impossible or extremely unlikely. For example,for Q15, we
excluded any responses that stated that the numberof pupils that had
submitted work was larger than than the total numberin the class.
Similarly, for Q25, we excluded any respondents whosaid they worked full
time and worked fewer than 20 hours per week.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic30

Missing responses
Some respondents did not provide answers to everyquestion. Rather than using
imputation to create artificial responses , non-responseswere excluded from the
analysis for each question. This means that, for eachquestion, the analysis shows
the percentages of all those who answered that particularquestion, not of all
survey respondents. For example, where a questionhad possible answers of ‘Yes,
‘No’ and ‘Not sure’, we report the number who said‘Yes’ as a percentage of the
number who said ‘Yes, ‘No’ or ‘Not sure’.
Weighting
Comparison to published Department for Education dataon the teacher workforce
across all state-funded schools in England revealedthat the survey sample was
not representative (see Table 2). We therefore appliedweighting to the survey
responses to ensure that results were representativeof the teacher workforce. The
weights were calculated based on the school sectorrespondents teach in, their
age band and their gender, since the combination ofthese variables was available
from the school workforce census. In particular, thisincreased the weighting on
the responses of younger survey respondents and thosewho taught in primary
schools. To avoid applying large weights to smallgroups of respondents, regional
weightings were not applied.
The teacher workforce data used is only availablefor state-funded primary,
secondary and special schools. Therefore, independentschool teachers and those
working in post-16 institutions remained unweighted.Additionally, we did not
re-weight the responses to each individual question,so the sample for each
individual question may not reflect the teacher workforceas a whole.
Linking to external datasets
We used the school postcode outcode reported by therespondent to link the
survey data to a selection of external datasets toprovide additional context for
analysis (see Table 1). The external data used waspublished at output area (OA),
lower super output area (LSOA) or middle super outputarea (MSOA) level, and
hence could not be directly mapped to the postcodeoutcode stated by
respondents. To create data for the postcode outcodes,we calculated the
proportion of each outcode area that is in each OA,LSOA or MSOA. We used
these proportions to create weighted re-aggregationsof each measure for each
postcode outcode. Every outcode was then ranked andsplit into quartiles for
each measure.
Statistical significance
In order to draw conclusions about sub-groups of teacherswithin the survey, we
tested whether their average response (mean) for eachquestion was statistically
significantly different to the average among all otherrespondents. Statistical
significance was calculated using a two-tailed t-testand groups significantly
different at the 1% and 5% levels were highlighted.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic31

Bibliography
Allmann K. Covid-19 is increasing digital inequality:We need human connectivity
to close the digital divide [Internet]. 2020 [cited2020 Jul 27]. Available from:
https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/research-and-subject-groups/oxfordshire-digital-inclusi
on-project/blog/2020/04/covid-19-increasing
Andrew A, Cattan S, Dias MC, Farquharson C, KraftmanL, Krutikova S, et al.
Inequalities in children’s experiences of home learningduring the COVID-19
lockdown in England. Fisc Stud. 2020;41(3):653–83.
Ashikkali L, Carroll W, Johnson C. The indirect impactof COVID-19 on child
health. Paediatr Child Health (Oxford). 2020;30:430–7.
Barnardo’s. Briefing for MPs & Peers: Children’s mentalhealth and Covid-19. 2020
Bignardi G, Dalmaijer ES, Anwyl-Irvine AL, Smith TA,Siugzdaite R, Uh S, et al.
Longitudinal increases in childhood depression symptomsduring the COVID-19
lockdown. Arch Dis Child. 2020;Epub ahead(Dec 9).
BIHR COVID-19 Scientific Advisory Group. Children’sphysical activity during
Covid-19 from the Born in Bradford Cohort. 2021
Bimpong KAA, Tolley CL, Slight SP. Relationship betweenlabour force
satisfaction, wages and retention within the UK NationalHealth Service: a
systematic review of the literature. BMJ Open. 2020;10:e034919.
Brazendale K, Beets MW, Weaver RG, Pate RR, Turner-McGrievyGM, Kaczynski
AT, et al. Understanding differences between summervs. school obesogenic
behaviors of children: the structured days hypothesis.Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act.
2017;14:100.
Cabinet Office. An interview with John Pullinger,former UK National Statistician
[Internet]. Civil Service Quarterly. 2019 [cited 2019Mar 13]. Available from:
https://quarterly.blog.gov.uk/2019/10/30/an-interview-with-john-pullinger-former-uk-
national-statistician/
Cromarty H. Research briefing: Gypsies and Travellers[Internet]. 2019. Available
from:https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-8083/
Daubney A, Fautley M. Editorial Research: Music educationin a time of pandemic.
Br J Music Educ. 2020;37:107–14.
Foster D. Research Briefing: Teacher recruitment andretention in England
[Internet]. 2020. Available from:
https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-7222/
Girlguiding. Early findings on the impact of Covid-19on girls and young women
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic32

[Internet]. 2020. Available from:
https://www.girlguiding.org.uk/globalassets/docs-and-resources/research-and-ca
mpaigns/girlguiding-covid19-research-briefing.pdf
Greenhow C, Lewin C, Staudt Willet KB. The educationalresponse to Covid-19
across two countries: a critical examination of initialdigital pedagogy adoption.
Technol Pedagog Educ. 2020.
Gutman LM, Joshi H, Parsonage M, Schoon I. Childrenof the new century: Mental
health findings from the Millenium Cohort Study. 2015.
Hansard. Free School Meals Volume 682: debated onWednesday 21 October
2020 [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Feb 13]. Availablefrom:
https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2020-10-21/debates/79C0CA8D-CADF-4
562-9317-5A51810BB5DE/FreeSchoolMeals
Human Rights Watch. UK: Children in England goinghungry with schools shut.
Uneven UK approach for Covid-19 doesn’t guaranteechildren’s right to food
[Internet]. 2020. Available from:
https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/05/27/uk-children-england-going-hungry-schools
-shut
International Literacy Centre. Responding to COVID-19,Briefing Note 3: Resetting
educational priorities in challenging times. 2020.
Irwin, A. No PhDs needed: how citizen science is transformingresearch [Internet].
Nature. 2018. Available from:
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07106-5
Katz V, Gonzalez C. Toward meaningful connectivity:using multilevel
communication research to reframe digital inequality.J Commun. 2016;66:236–49.
Kim LE, Asbury K. ‘Like a rug had been pulled fromunder you’: The impact of
COVID-19 on teachers in England during the first sixweeks of the UK lockdown.
Br J Educ Psychol. 2020;90:1062–83.
Kim LE, Leary R, Asbury K. ‘We need clear directions,if we’re going to move
forward. It’s as simple as that’: Teachers’ narrativesduring partial school
reopenings in the COVID-19 pandemic. PsyArXiv. 2020.
Lough C. Exclusive: Exhausted teachers ‘pushed tothe brink’ [Internet]. Times
Educational Supplement. 2020 [cited 2021 Feb 13].Available from:
https://www.tes.com/news/exclusive-exhausted-teachers-pushed-brink
Lucas M, Nelson J, Sims D. Schools’ responses to Covid-19.Pupil engagement in
remote learning [Internet]. 2020. Available from:
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4073/schools_responses_to_covid_19_pupil_engag
ement_in_remote_learning.pdf
Moss G. Responding to COVID-19, Briefing Note 3: Resettingeducational
priorities in challenging times. London; 2020.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic33

Nocker M, Sena V. Big data and human resources management:the rise of talent
analytics. Soc Sci. 2019;8:273.
Open Data Institute. Data about children’s lives inthe pandemic [Internet]. 2020.
Available from:https://theodi.org/article/data-about-children-during-covid19/
Oyedemi T. Digital inequalities and implications forsocial inequalities: A study of
Internet penetration amongst university students inSouth Africa. Telemat
Informatics. 2012;29:302–13.
Perryman J, Calvert G. What motivates people to teach,and why do they leave?
Accountability, performativity and teacher retention.Br J Educ Stud.
2020;68(1):3–23.
Rice K, Wynne B, Martin V, Ackland GJ. Effect of schoolclosures on mortality from
coronavirus disease 2019: old and new predictions.Br Med J. 2020;371:m3588.
Slates SL, Alexander KL, Entwisle D, Olson LS. Counteractingsummer slide:
social capital resources within socioeconomicallydisadvantaged families. J Educ
Students Placed Risk. 2012;17(3):165–85.
Taylor L. What is data justice? The case for connectingdigital rights and freedoms
globally. Big Data Soc. 2017;4(2).
Toropova A, Myrberg E, Johansson S. Teacher job satisfaction:the importance of
school working conditions and teacher characteristics.Educ Rev.
2021;73(1):71–97.
Veldman I, van Tartwijk J, Brekelmans M, Wubbels T.Job satisfaction and teacher
student relationships across the teaching career:Four case studies. Teach Teach
Educ. 2013;32:55–65.
White P, Selwyn N. Learning online? Educational Internetuse and participation in
adult learning, 2002 to 2010. Educ Rev [Internet].2012;64(4):451–69.
Open Data Institute 2021Data on teachers’ lives duringthe pandemic34