

 
 

 
Contents 
Open communications1 
Contents1 
About1 
Executive summary2 
Background3 
Open data ecosystems4 
The value of sharing data6 
Workshop format and attendance7 
The communications data ecosystem8 
Use cases for open communications10 
Greatest benefit to consumers10 
Greatest benefit to providers11 
Quick wins12 
Risks12 
Recommendations14 
Appendix 1: Workshop Attendance15 
Appendix 2: Additional Resources16 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report was produced as part of a three-year innovation programme funded by 
Innovate UK. The views in this report are those of the authors. 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute (ODI), 
and was published in August 2020. The lead authors are Josh D’Addario and Jeni 
Tennison; ODI. 
 
To share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact Josh D’Addario, at 
info@theodi.org​.  
 
 
 
 
To share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact 
Josh D’Addario, at info@theodi.org 
 

 
Executive summary 
Alongside the wider smart data initiatives championed by the Department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), Ofcom, the UK's communications regulator, is 
currently exploring a data portability initiative: open communications. Open 
communications would enable people and businesses to share data about their use of 
telecoms services, held by their providers, with third parties who could help them 
navigate the market and get a better deal. 
 
As part of the ​Innovate UK R&D Programme​, the Open Data Institute (ODI) convened a 
workshop with industry representatives to generate use cases for consumers and 
providers and to look at the potential risks of enabling people and businesses to share 
more information about their use of communications services. Findings from the 
workshop included the potential to provide better products to consumers, better insights 
to service providers, while acknowledging the risks of increasing access to data. 
 
Making a sector more open is a long journey, but the communications data ecosystem is 
poised for such a change and Ofcom will not be the first organisation to attempt a 
sector-wide open data initiative. Ofcom has been looking at similar initiatives in other 
industries to understand what works best and what should be avoided. Importantly, 
Ofcom will have to understand what combination of mandate, reward and opportunity 
needs to be created to motivate organisations to change and ensure benefits reach as 
many stakeholder groups as possible. 
 
  
 

 
Background  
The ODI works with companies and governments to build an open, trustworthy data 
ecosystem, where people can make better decisions using data and manage any 
harmful impacts. In November 2019, we hosted a workshop for Ofcom, the UK 
communications regulator, looking at the future of data sharing in the communications 
sector. 
 
The communications data ecosystem contains data that exists on a spectrum, from 
1
closed, to shared, to open. Below is a graphic of ​The Data Spectrum​, produced by the 
ODI. Much of the data is closed or shared in a limited manner for security and privacy 
reasons, such as security credentials and call data records (CDRs). Some data is shared 
widely such as product information, coverage, and store location. Ofcom ​publishes open 
data​ on a variety of topics such as fixed and mobile network coverage and the service 
quality that providers offer. 
2
 
An open communications initiative would seek to increase open and shared data in the 
sector in a way that maximises value for communications customers, opportunities for 
companies, and provides further benefits to society. This could be done by looking at 
what data infrastructure could become more open. When data is more open, more 
people can access, use and share that data.  
 
 
 
  
1
 Open Data Institute (n.d.). The Data Spectrum. 
https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/the-data-spectrum/  
2
 Ofcom (2020), “Open data”, 
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/research-and-data/data/opendata  
 

 
Open data ecosystems 
Data infrastructure​ consists of data assets such as datasets, registers and common 
identifiers like metadata. It also includes the standards and technologies used to curate 
and provide access to those data assets and the guidance and policies that inform the 
use and management of data assets. It can also include the organisations that govern 
the data infrastructure and has to involve the communities involved in contributing to or 
maintaining it; and those who are impacted by decisions that are made using it.  
3
 
Increased access to certain communications data infrastructure, including identifiers or 
other standards, or even the metadata to closed or shared data, could boost innovation 
in the sector that benefits customers. 
 
Other regulators and industry bodies have explored and implemented initiatives to 
increase access to data in their sectors: 
 
●Open banking​ allows retail banking customers to share account and transaction 
data with trusted partners. When securely shared, the data can be used to build 
useful services such as account aggregation and personal financial 
management. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is looking to expand this 
4
to other financial data sources under the banner of open finance.  
5
●Open energy​ standards could help to change markets, create open ecosystems 
and implement policy objectives. It could improve consumer control over energy 
data about them, and support the creation of innovative new energy services. 
6
●An ​open water​ initiative could benefit all parts of the sector, allowing water 
companies to learn from each other, encouraging efficiency in sharing 
technology and increasing transparency to customers, leading to greater 
customer satisfaction. 
7
●The ​OpenActive​ programme from Sport England and the ODI is currently helping 
the sports and leisure sector adopt data standards and publish open data with 
the hope of getting more people in England active. 
 
There is also support from UK government initiatives for making data ecosystems as 
open as possible: 
 
●In October 2018 HM Treasury sought views and evidence on its Digital 
Competition Expert Panel. ​The expert panel concluded​ that data openness can 
be used as a tool to promote competition, where it is determined this is 
3
 Dodds, L. & Wells, P. (2019) Issues in Open Data - Data Infrastructure. In T. Davies, S. 
Walker, M. Rubinstein, & F. Perini (Eds.), The State of Open Data: Histories and Horizons. 
Cape Town and Ottawa: African Minds and International Development Research Centre. 
https://www.stateofopendata.od4d.net/chapters/issues/data-infrastructure.html 
4
 Open Data Institute (2019), “How far Open Banking has come: our five takeaways”, 
https://theodi.org/article/how-far-open-banking-has-come-our-five-takeaways  
5
 Financial Conduct Authority (2019), “FCA asks for proposals on how open finance could 
transform financial services”, 
https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-asks-proposals-how-open-finance-could-
transform-financial-services  
6
 Open Data Institute, “R&D: Open standards for the UK energy sector”, 
https://theodi.org/project/open-standards-for-the-uk-energy-sector/#1558340061441-cb8
100c5-47f3 
7
 Ofwat (2017), “Driving innovation in water”, 
https://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Driving-innovation-in-water-FINAL
.pdf  
 

 
necessary and proportionate to achieve its aims, such as in the case of enduring 
market power. 
8
●In 2019, the ​Smart Data Review​ was published as part of the UK Industrial 
Strategy. This review proposed that greater access to telecoms data would 
foster innovation to improve consumer outcomes by: 
○accelerating the development of innovative data-driven services in 
consumer markets 
○using data and technology to help vulnerable consumers 
○ensuring consumers and their data are protected. 
9
 
In Australia the rollout of the ​Consumer Data Right​ will help give consumers greater 
access to and control over personal data, starting with banking and gradually increasing 
to include energy, telecoms, and health. 
10
 
Our first look into ​open APIs in the telecoms industry​ demonstrated that there is potential 
to enable new products and services that meet the needs of a wide set of users. In this 
11
context, the ODI looked further into what it would take to bring more openness to 
communications data. 
 
  
8
 Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2019), “Unlocking Digital 
Competition: Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel”, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/785547/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf  
9
 Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2019), “Smart Data: Putting 
consumers in control of their data and enabling innovation”, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/808272/Smart-Data-Consultation.pdf  
10
 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission (2017), “Consumer Data Right (CDR)”, 
https://www.accc.gov.au/focus-areas/consumer-data-right-cdr-0  
11
 Projects by IF (2018), “Open APIs in the Telecoms Industry”, 
https://openapis.projectsbyif.com/  
 

 
The value of sharing 
data 
Businesses can create value by using third-party data to develop new products and 
services. Our research has shown that they can unlock additional value by sharing data 
they have collected. Increasing access to data held in the private sector has proven 
12
benefits to businesses in many ways, including: 
 
●Improving supply chain efficiency 
13
●Increasing market reach 
14
●Facilitating ​benchmarking and market insights 
15
●Building trust 
16
●Improving efficiencies through ​open innovation, including within ​regulated 
17
markets 
18
●Collaborating to ​address sector-wide challenges 
19
 
Our research with the Bennett Institute at the University of Cambridge on ​the value of 
dat​a​ has shown that despite increasing access to data being an important way to unlock 
its wider economic and social benefits, there are various market failures around data and 
the data economy that mean data sharing initiatives will not necessarily emerge on their 
own. 
20
 
  
12
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Report: Sharing data to create value in the private sector”, 
https://theodi.org/article/report-sharing-data-to-create-value-in-the-private-sector/  
13
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data in supply chain optimisation”, 
 ​https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-in-supply-chain-optimisation/  
14
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data for improving market reach”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-for-improving-market-reach/ 
15
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data for benchmarking and insights”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-for-benchmarking-and-insights/  
16
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data to build trust”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-build-trust/  
17
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data to drive open innovation”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-drive-open-innovation/  
18
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data in regulated environments”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-in-regulated-environments/  
19
 Open Data Institute (2020), “Case study: The value of sharing data to address sector challenges”, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-address-sector-challenges/  
20
 Open Data Institute & Nuffield Foundation (2020), “Valuing data: foundations for data policy”, 
https://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/project/valuing-data-foundations-for-data-policy  
 

 
Workshop format and 
attendance 
The workshop hosted participants from a variety of backgrounds such as potential data 
users, consumer advocacy groups and government. The full list of attendees is included 
in ​Appendix 1​. The workshop was convened to help better understand the potential for 
Ofcom’s open communications initiative. The workshop did not include communications 
providers as we wanted to give more space to organisations that could start to use open 
communications data for innovative new consumer-facing applications or have 
experience doing this in other sectors. 
 
Select participants were requested to give short presentations on their organisations, 
and on what an open communications initiative might mean to them. These speakers 
were: 
 
●OpenWrks​ – an open banking service provider and potential data user under 
open communications, who focussed on the opportunities for data users to 
provide better services for customers through access to data from customers 
and industry. 
●Which?​ – a consumer organisation that aims to help consumers make the right 
choices around purchases through testing and advice. They spoke of the 
potential to improve customer outcomes through increased availability to data 
and information.  
●uSwitch​ – a price comparison and switching service for energy, personal 
finance, insurance and communications services that saw open communications 
as a way to improve their service to customers and expand it beyond price 
comparison. 
  
Participants engaged in ‘data ecosystem mapping’ to understand the current 
communications data ecosystem and some of its potential under open communications. 
Participants also created example use cases in which both consumers and providers of 
communications services could benefit, and explored their associated risks. 
  
 

 
The communications 
data ecosystem 
Data infrastructure can be hard for people to visualise and understand. We therefore 
need to create ways to understand the ecosystems it supports. These aid 
communication and enable us to make better decisions about investing in and operating 
that infrastructure to maximise the value it provides. One approach is a ​data ecosystem 
map​. 
 
A data ecosystem map identifies the key data stewards and users, the relationships 
between them and the different roles they play. In the workshop, participants created 
data ecosystem maps to share information and discuss the current and potential 
telecoms data ecosystem. 
 
Example mobile data ecosystem map from the workshop redrawn on kumu: 
  
 
All the ecosystem maps were different but they captured the complexity of the data 
ecosystem, with large numbers of actors playing a variety of roles in the ecosystem and 
creating value in different ways. 
 
All the maps highlighted two main aspects: how consumers navigate the 
communications market; and how different types of communications providers access 
data and value across the ecosystem. 
 
 

 
A variety of other insights were highlighted by the groups through the mapping exercise 
and subsequent presentations, such as: 
 
●Valuable communications related data sits not just with mobile providers, but 
also adjacent organisations, such as banks, transport companies, and 
regulators. 
●Customers could be incentivised to share communications data and more with 
mobile providers as well as third parties in order to improve service delivery. 
●The physical infrastructure of the ecosystem can influence the data and value 
flows of the ecosystem. 
●Mapping the data ecosystem could help new challengers identify where to 
access data from. 
●Consumers provide data and money and often get back value in the form of 
services and insights, but do not receive monetary compensation for providing 
data. 
 
With a better shared understanding of the data ecosystem they operate in, the workshop 
then moved on to the main focus, use case generation. 
  
 

 
Use cases for open 
communications 
Workshop teams were asked four questions about the potential of increasing access to 
data in the communications sector, and generated, discussed and prioritised their 
answers. The four questions all had the same format: 
 
●What are the possible services that could have ​most benefit to 
communications customers? 
●What are the possible services that could have the ​most benefit to 
communications providers? 
●What are the possible services that could be the​ easiest to implement​ with 
increased access to data? 
●What are the ​risks that are associated​ with possible new services? 
Greatest benefit to consumers 
The overarching theme of what would be the greatest benefit to consumers was around 
finding the communications products that were best suited for them. Comparing, 
switching, aggregating and managing communications products based on their needs 
and lifestyle – such as location, commute, living situation – were seen as the greatest 
benefits of increased access to communications data. Other priority products included 
bill splitting in shared households, unbundling services across multiple providers for the 
best deal, and understanding usage patterns in public services.  
 
Lower priority services included: 
 
●Automated switching across service providers 
●Emergency services locator 
●Add-ons without tie-ins and shorter tie-in on contracts 
 
In our previous work on ​Open APIs in Telecoms​ we looked at three potential use cases 
that could benefit telecoms customers. These use cases were tested with 
21
communications providers to ensure their feasibility. 
 
●Choosing a new mobile network​. Comparison sites are typically geared towards 
price, helping people find the cheapest deal. Using data for signal strength, 
ethical preferences such as carbon footprint and sourcing practices, or real data 
usage this could enable the creation of services for managing and switching 
between mobile network providers based on more than price. 
●Managing utility bills in a shared household​.  Most utility companies do not 
optimise for the complexity of people living together in shared houses, including 
shared responsibility for paying and managing the bills and some people 
21
 Open Data Institute (2018), “Building the future: opportunities for new services and 
stronger digital rights in telecoms and utilities”, 
https://theodi.org/article/building-the-future-opportunities-for-new-services-and-stronger-di
gital-rights-in-telecoms-and-utilities/  
 

 
periodically moving. Making this data portable could help to split the bills in a 
household, while allowing everyone to see all the accounts in one place. 
●Improving a city’s air quality using bulk location data from mobile phones​. Cities 
may have rich street-level data about air quality, but can lack footfall and cyclist 
data. Better data would help urban planners working to combat pollution to 
prioritise the streets in which the highest number of people are affected by poor 
air quality. 
Greatest benefit to providers 
Increasing access to communications data could also benefit the organisations currently 
stewarding this data. Our research shows that private sector organisations can gain 
value from sharing data. In the Open Banking ecosystem, traditional banks have 
benefitted from improved Know-Your-Customer (KYC) – the process whereby a business 
verifies the identity and suitability of their customers, the ability to create personalised 
product offerings, and access to competitor customer information. 
 
There were no current representatives from communications providers present at this 
workshop, but participants discussed how providers could benefit from improving their 
service provision. Open communications could give communications providers a better 
understanding of the market by having better insights to customer preferences and 
service use through consented data access. Service providers would potentially be able 
to compete better by providing personalised services, using competitor data to target 
certain market segments, and improve services with non-telecoms data. 
 
Lower priority services that were mentioned in this category included: 
 
●Targeting investment in networks (in infrastructure, coverage, etc.) 
●Understanding switch incentives 
●Consumer feedback mechanisms 
●Upselling to customers 
●Identifying vulnerable consumers 
●Identifying opportunities to share assets with competitors 
●Standardisation of product metrics 
 
Communications providers are investing in new technologies that have the potential to 
generate large quantities of data. Analysing data generated from Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices, software defined networks (SDNs) - the separation of network control functions 
from network data functions - and network function virtualization (NFV) - software 
implementations of network functions - could provide a lot of value to communications 
providers. Given the difficult nature of analysis however, communications companies 
22
may be best served using an open innovation approach that draws on external expertise. 
This approach could be facilitated by the wider open communications initiative in similar 
ways to how the Data Pitch programme was able to do so for data providers in different 
sectors. 
23
22
 Cisco (n.d.) “SDN vs. NFV: What’s the difference?”, 
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/software-defined-networking/sdn-vs-nfv.html 
23
 London Economics (Jan 2020), “Data Pitch Evaluation”, 
https://datapitch.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/London-Economics-Data-Pitch-evaluati
on-FINAL-PDF.pdf 
 

 
Quick wins 
Some services will be more difficult to implement in the market than others due to 
technical requirements or data privacy and sensitivity. In order to ensure continued 
momentum and support for an open communications initiative, lower risk and more 
technically simple services could be implemented first.  
 
Participants noted that publishing some types of data could be an easy “quick win”, such 
as open standards around products, and data around geographic coverage. Groups 
also noted that enabling people to combine their communications data with data from 
other household utilities for ease of bills management could feature in the first rollout of 
services.  
 
Lower priority services that were mentioned in this category included: 
 
●Publishing better and more product data for Price Comparison Websites (PCWs) 
●Standard publication of usage data per service and per user 
●Make metadata available to help decide which data to share first 
●Publishing fuller information on tariffs 
 
Outside of increasing access to customer data to third parties, open communications 
could also mandate organisations to publish open data. Ofcom and the industry should 
focus on first publishing data that is of low risk to data providers and high benefit to 
potential users, they should consider: 
 
●Publishing data without personal information openly first removes the need for 
potentially risky anonymisation processes. 
●Publishing low risk geospatial data - data about a place, such as a building, 
river, or city  - quickly has the additional benefit of improving the overall 
geospatial data infrastructure of a region, with uses beyond the communications 
sector. 
●Publishing data on terms and conditions for various communications products 
could promote consumer choice and protection but requires some 
standardisation of product offerings. 
Risks 
In order for a data ecosystem to be trusted it must be trustworthy. Having an 
understanding of the risks of increasing openness and putting in place measures to 
combat those risks is a fundamental aspect of trustworthy data stewardship. 
 
The results of this question were mixed across the groups but the main theme to emerge 
was a lack of initial trust from consumers to share personal data with third parties. This 
risk is not new when trying to implement an open data initiative and was a similar 
concern with Open Banking. Another key set of risks were around the misuse of data 
after being shared, a concern that can go hand in hand with low consumer trust. 
 
Lower priority risks included: 
●Large costs for industry 
●Slow progress developing standards 
 

 
●Misleading recommendations due to incomplete sets of data being used 
●Lack of market incentives 
●Potential for unacceptable price discrimination 
 
There are important steps that Ofcom and industry organisations can take to reduce the 
risk and minimise harm from increasing access to data, such as: 
 
●Ensuring strict alignment to regulation around personal data such as the General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the EU, and ​using proper anonymisation 
techniques when aggregating personal data so that it can be opened. 
24
●Implementing data ethics assessments that go beyond compliance and legal 
issues. Tools such as the ​ODI’s Data Ethics Canvas​ can help identify and make 
decisions about potential ethical issues. Publishing findings openly can help 
build trust.  
25
●Implementing safeguards so that incumbent communications providers do not 
unfairly benefit and that vulnerable customers are protected from harm. 
 
  
24
 Open Data Institute (2019), “Anonymisation and open data: An introduction to managing 
the risk of re-identification”, 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CoXniaTnQL_4ZyQuji9_MA_YCEElQjx4z1SEdB08c
2M/edit#  
25
 Open Data Institute (2019),”The Data Ethics Canvas, 
https://theodi.org/article/data-ethics-canvas/#1557853049317-baab6160-135f  
 

 
Recommendations 
It takes a lot of work to create an open, trustworthy data ecosystem. Ofcom is well 
positioned to begin that journey. The communications sector is poised for a data 
portability initiative, and there is interest by end users, data users and providers. There 
are other sectors to look at for inspiration and caution. Culture change in a sector 
requires understanding the various motivations of the different actors. Ofcom will have to 
understand what combination of mandate, reward and opportunity needs to be created, 
and for whom, to further the goals of the initiative. 
 
Ofcom should focus on the next steps in their journey so as to ensure a strong 
foundation to move forward: 
 
●Confer with key representatives from other data portability initiatives in the 
energy, water, and banking sectors to learn best practice and where pitfalls may 
exist 
●Seek buy-in from the industry’s main service providers to ensure a smooth 
implementation and achievement of goals 
●Convene a working group of different industry representatives to develop a 
programme of activity for further discovery and implementation 
●Focus initial work on a non-contentious and low risk quick win, such as 
geospatial data 
●Explore ways to stimulate and encourage further work on specific use cases. 
This might involve engaging in discovery projects, funding hackdays or offering 
stimulus funding for small projects 
●Promote and sponsor further engagement and research to understand the data 
ecosystem better, such as a report on communications data infrastructure and 
standards, or on an appropriate ​model for data access​, such as a ​data trust​ or 
other institution for data that cannot be openly published. 
  
 

 
Appendix 1: Workshop 
Attendance 
The following organisations had one or more members attending the workshop: 
 
●Ofcom 
●Which? 
●Bud 
●OpenWrks 
●OpenDataSoft 
●USwitch 
●DCMS 
●UK Regulators Network 
●Open Data Institute 
  
 

 
Appendix 2: Additional 
Resources 
●Mapping data ecosystems​ methodology and ​tool​ – a tool for documenting and 
mapping data ecosystems 
●Open APIs in the Telecoms Industry 
●The ODI’s ​Data Toolkit for Business​ is a set of collaborative tools that will help 
businesses unlock the value of data 
●Open standards for the UK energy sector 
●Furman Review: Access to data is a new tool against monopoly 
●Anonymisation and open data: An introduction to managing the risk of 
re-identification 
●How far Open Banking has come: our five takeaway 
●Open Standards for Data​ - This guidebook helps people and organisations 
create, develop and adopt open standards for data. 
●Open data for public services​ – includes example data ecosystem maps 
●Report: Sharing data to create value in the private sector 
●Data sharing in the private sector​ - includes case studies on businesses gaining 
value from increasing access to data they hold and a ​summary report 
●The Value of Data report​ - exploring ideas around how to effectively and ethically 
tap into the value of data 
 