

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/1/5
Open data that drives business
Fri Sep 9, 2016
Share
UK companies are using government and non-government open data from a
wide range of sectors.
Open data that drives business
UK companies are using government and non-government open data
from a wide range of sectors
The UK is ranked top of 86 countries by the Open Data Barometer, which
measures a country’s readiness to secure benefits from open data, its publication
of key datasets and evidence of emerging impacts from open government data.
The UK’s central repository of public sector open data, data.gov.uk, contains nearly
15,000 datasets published with an Open Government License. Substantial open
data resources are also published by non-government sources, such as nonprofits
and community groups.
Uses of government open data
A large proportion (70%) of companies that responded to our survey use open data
provided by government.
Survey respondents were also asked to list the government datasets used in their
companies. In total, 25 different open data sources were named, spanning central
and local government and other public sector bodies, with numerous examples
given of specific datasets. Many companies listed multiple datasets, with some
stating that they used too many to list for the purposes of the survey. Appendix
Table A3.1 summarises the survey responses on this topic.
Ordnance Survey (OS) was cited most frequently (27% of companies) as an open
data source. OS is Britain’s national mapping agency and a member of the Public
Data Group. It has operated as a government-owned company since 1 April 2015.
Companies also use open data related to local regions. Local and regional
government (listed by 18% of companies) and the Department for Communities
and Local Government, a ministerial department concerned with community policy
Knowledge & opinion >

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/2/5
(listed by 14% of the companies), are sources of open datasets that companies use
recurrently.
Other sources of open government data listed frequently include the Department
for Transport and related bodies, the Office for National Statistics (ONS)
and Companies House, which were listed by 20%, 18% and 14% of respondent
companies respectively.
Uses of non-government open data
Almost half (49%) of the surveyed companies use open data from non-government
sources such as businesses, nonprofits and community projects.
The companies we surveyed were asked to list the datasets they use from non-
government sources. Appendix Table A3.2 summarises the responses. Together,
they named 14 different sources, and listed a variety of different datasets within
them.
Use of open geographic data is particularly popular amongst those companies
that listed specific open data sources in their responses. OpenStreetMap, an
openly licensed map of the world created by volunteers – with extensive
annotations available as open data – is used by 24% of these companies.
Companies also use open data from various non-governmental, international
projects, generally developed by communities of members seeking to make large
quantities of data available for widespread use. Projects such
as DBpedia, geonames, Wikimapia, p-lei.org,
DMOZ, OpenCorporates and OpenCharities are all cited as sources of open data
used by the companies.
Transport-related data sources are also popular. These include Traveline,
the Association of Train Operating Companies (ATOC), the General Transit Feed
Specification (GTFS), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
and the National Air Traffic Services (NATS).
We can identify how companies use a combination of government and non-
government open data by looking at those that responded to both of the above
questions. Appendix Table A3.3 summarises these combined responses.
The most number of respondent companies (39%) use open data from both
government and non-government sources, although only a tenth (10%) are using
non-government open data exclusively. This may indicate the importance of the
role of government in the open data ecosystem, as a publisher of data to support
development of new products and services, and as the driver of policy interventions
related to open data and innovation.
It is important to note that around a fifth of respondents (21%) stated that they were
not using data from either type of source, which could represent those companies

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/3/5
that solely provide infrastructure and/or publish open data and do not make use of it
themselves.
What types of data do companies use most
When describing the open data they use, companies were able to select multiple
sectors. Their responses show that data from a wide range is being used.
Figure 3.1 - Responses to the question "What types of open data does your company use?" (n=76, multiple
responses allowed). See Appendix Table A3.4 for a table of responses including frequencies.
Geospatial/mapping open data is used by more than half (57%) of all respondent
companies. Several other types of open data are used by more than a third of
respondents, namely transportation (43%), environment (42%), demographics
& social (40%) and business (38%) data.Respondent companies often use open
data from multiple sectors. In fact, 79% of companies use data related to more
than one sector and 14% of them use data related to more than 10. The mean and
median number of data types by sector used by companies is 4.75 and 4
respectively. These usage statistics, combined with detailed statements made by
the companies interviewed, suggests that commercial value can be drawn from
combining open datasets.
“

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/4/5
Companies could select ‘other’ for data they felt was not covered by the prescribed
list of sectors, and to name those they used. They listed sectors like ‘3D’, ‘crime’,
‘Internet of Things’, ‘jobs data’ and ‘political’. These responses not only further
reflect the wide breadth of open data use by sector, but also open data use in
combination with other emerging technologies. For example, the development of
“How do we make money? Well, people are engaging with
us to build systems that use [...] this [Environment Agency]
data or mix it with other datasets, to come up with
something useful. So it’s become quite a big part of our
business.”
“
– Rod Plummer, Shoothill
”
“The data was siloed. You couldn’t search across multiple
company registers, you couldn’t search for directors
across multiple jurisdictions and you couldn’t combine the
information from those registers together. We felt that the
need was essentially to create a single unifie d interface to
all of this data, allowing it to come together. Insight
generally comes from combining more than one dataset
together. As each dataset becomes available as open
data, the opportunities for taking that and coming up with
completely new business models, and new ideas about
what’s possible, are tremendous.” 
– Chris Taggart, OpenCorporates
“
”
“Individual datasets? Yes they are accessible, but
individual datasets by themselves don’t really add that
much value. It’s only when you combine it, you clash things
together, that you start seeing some value coming out of
it.” 
– Clifford McDowell, Doorda
“
”

27/10/2022, 14:13Open data that drives business – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/research-open-data-means-business-pg3/5/5
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
widespread 3D printing capabilities and the growth of Internet of Things networks
will raise new questions about the potential of open data. Companies in the UK are
beginning to address these questions.
The other sections in this report focus on the range of companies investing in open
data, business strategies, the challenges they face and some real-life company
examples of open data innovation.
How to cite
Please cite this report as: Open Data Institute (2015) Open data means business:
UK innovation across sectors and regions. London, UK. Available at open-data-
means-business-uk-innovation-sectors-regions
PREVIOUS PAGE / NEXT PAGE
“You could have a situation where we are building a silo of
data around, say, Camden or something, but actually there
are so many use cases that need to be fulfil led. If you don’t
have an easy data exchange, the industry is not going to
grow. The reason why the web has taken off is because we
got rid of the silos. I think for Internet of Things the same
thing needs to happen in order to [have the same]
explosion.” 
– Yodit Stanton, OpenSensors.io
“
”