



Contents
Executive summary4
Background5
The energy data ecosystem5
The ‘Data for good’ initiative7
The smart meter data ecosystem8
Workshop format and attendance10
Use cases for smart meter system data11
Key stakeholders12
Sustainable data access12
Technical infrastructure13
Barriers, risks and mitigations for smart meter system data14
Building trust: mitigating risks and equitable benefits14
Recommendations16
Appendix 1: The value of sharing data18
Appendix 2: Data access initiatives in other sectors19
Appendix 3: Additional resources21
About
This report was produced as part of a research project funded by the Data
Communications Company (DCC). The views in this report are those of the authors.
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute (ODI),
and was published in June 2021. The lead authors are Josh D’Addario and James
Maddison; ODI.
To share feedback on this report by email or to get in touch, contact the ODI, at
info@theodi.org.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem2

Executive summary
The Data Communications Company (DCC) is a licensed monopoly set up to design,
deliver and manage the smart meter system in Great Britain. This supports the digital
backbone of Britain's energy infrastructure. At scale, 30m homes and businesses will be
connected to a single, secure, smart metering network.
DCC is currently exploring a data access initiative to improve access to smart meter
system data. Similar programmes exist across the energy sector already. Open Energy,
supported by Ofgem and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
(BEIS), seeks to improve data access in the sector through open data standards for data
sharing. The Smart Data initiative, also from BEIS, is aimed at improving data portability
across sectors to provide tangible benefits to customers and wider society.
In its discussion paper, ‘Data for good’, DCC proposes that organisations should work
together to improve access to smart meter ‘system data’ – effectively the metadata about
the typical transactional data we think of when imagining the smart meter data ecosystem.
The initiative would aim to increase the ability to analyse and use data about the smart
meter system, and combine it with data from other organisations, to address some of the
big challenges facing the UK, such as reaching net zero, transitioning to a flexible energy
system and reducing fuel poverty.
To support this initiative, at the Open Data Institute (ODI) we conducted two workshops to
explore the opportunities and barriers facing improving access to system data in the
smart meter data ecosystem. The first workshop participants were mainly potential users
of smart meter system data, including data-driven service providers, data intermediaries,
researchers and academia. The second workshop focused on public concerns of data
access and included mainly consumer organisations, civil society organisations and
charities.
Across both workshops the main focuses for improving data access in the smart meter
space were clear: achieving net zero and local decarbonisation; addressing consumer
vulnerability and fuel poverty; and optimising efficiency and reducing costs around
domestic energy and bills.
However, there are challenges to achieving these goals. Participants identified that proper
safeguards to security and privacy were needed, as well as strong mechanisms around
consent, progress monitoring and redress. Ensuring that risks are mitigated as much as
possible is crucial to building a trustworthy data ecosystem.
The energy sector is a complex space, and becoming more so with the trends towards
digitalisation, datafication (the process by which subjects, objects and practices are
transformed into data) and increased collaboration with people and organisations outside
the energy sector. But organisations like DCC are part of a data ecosystem comprising
people, organisations and initiatives pushing towards similar goals, and initiatives in other
industries can help them and their partners understand what works best and what should
be avoided. Importantly, DCC should embark on this journey in an open, transparent and
collaborative way so that it builds trust, understands how best to mitigate risks and ensure
benefits reach as many stakeholder groups as possible.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem3

Background
The ODI works with companies and governments to build an open, trustworthy data
ecosystem, where people can make better decisions using data and manage any
harmful impacts. In 2020, we began working with the Data Communications
Company (DCC) as part of the ‘R&D: Data infrastructurefor common challenges’
project funded by Innovate UK. The purpose of this collaboration was to help inform
some of the early thinking that DCC was doing for itsdata access initiativefocused
on improving access to smart meter system data
1
, andto learn about how
organisations such as the DCC were developing these types of initiatives. This
support included running workshops usingData EcosystemMappingand theData
Ethics Canvasto examine a particular use case inthe initiative.
Following the project close and the official launch of the DCC’s system data
exchange initiative outlined in the ‘Data for good’discussion paper, we once again
worked with the DCC to facilitate an additional set of workshops exploring the
barriers and opportunities for improving the smart meter system data ecosystem.
This report discusses the importance of smart meter system data and improving
access to that data to further the goals of the wider UK energy sector. It also brings
together analysis of the opportunities and challenges around improving access to
that data, based on findings from two workshops with key stakeholders from across
the ecosystem. It ends with recommendations for DCC and other people and
organisations in the ecosystem.
The energy data ecosystem
In our2019 report on data infrastructure of the UKenergy sector,we stated the UK
energy sector faces a huge challenge: it must adapt to meet ambitious
decarbonisation targets and accommodate new technologies, while continuing to
satisfy complex and growing consumer expectations. Data will play an important role
in this shift.
2
The energy data ecosystem contains data that exists on aspectrum,
3
from closed, to
shared, to open. Below is a graphic of theData Spectrumfor Energy, produced by
the ODI and Icebreaker One.
4
Much of the data is closedor shared in a limited
manner for security and privacy reasons, such as the amount paid on household
energy bills. Some data is shared widely such as power outages, network coverage,
and asset locations. Ofgempublishes some statistics,for instance on market share
and customer service levels, but they are not licensed for commercial use.
5
5
Ofgem, ‘Data Portal Overview’,https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/data-portal/overview
4
Icebreaker One (2020), ‘Data Spectrum for Energy’,
https://icebreakerone.org/2020/10/02/data-spectrum-for-energy/
3
Open Data Institute (n.d.). ‘The Data Spectrum’.
https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/the-data-spectrum/
2
Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data infrastructurefor the UK energy sector 2019-05’,
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iVG6OZuATZLDn5UpXSEhWe-dd2hy1BJOqsPeI6n6JZ0/edit#
1
Smart meter system data refers to the metadata produced by the normal operations of smart meters. A
fuller description can be found in the next section.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem4

When data is more open, more people can access, use and share that data, to create
solutions to problems and make better decisions. Access to energy data could be
integral in solving some of the major social, economic and environmental challenges
we face, like reaching net zero or addressing fuel poverty.
Currently under the banner of ‘Smart Data’, in 2019,a data portability strategy was
published as part of the UK Industrial Strategy. This proposed that greater access to
data would foster innovation to improve consumer outcomes by:
●
accelerating the development of innovative data-driven services in consumer
markets
●
using data and technology to help vulnerable consumers
●
ensuring consumers and their data are protected.
6
There are several Smart Data, data portability and data access initiatives being
delivered in various sectors (seeappendix 3), andin recent years, we have seen the
energy sector taking collective action to increase access to data:
●
The energy regulator, Ofgem, is one of the organisations driving this agenda.
Its Decarbonisation Action Plan describes good data use and availability as
‘crucial to provide better visibility of system usage, spare capacity and
constraints, to inform investment needs, and to facilitate opportunities for
strategic coordination.
7
●
Recommendations from the UK government-ledEnergyData Taskforceand
now Energy Digitalisation Taskforce steering the industry toward improved
data availability, quality and transparency.
8
●
The launch ofModernising Energy Data, a joint initiativebetween Ofgem,
BEIS and Innovate UK, is underway with IceBreaker One developing anOpen
8
Gov.UK (2019), ‘Energy Data Taskforce’,https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/energy-data-taskforce
7
Ofgem (2020), ‘Ofgem’s Decarbonisation Action Plan’,
https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/publications-and-updates/ofgem-s-decarbonisation-action-plan
6
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2019), ‘Smart Data: Putting
consumers in control of their data and enabling innovation’,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/808272/Smart-Data-Consultation.pdf
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem5

Energyprototype to improve data interoperability, search and integration in
the energy sector.
9
The ‘Data for good’ initiative
The initiative outlined in the ‘Data for good’ discussion paper seeks to increase open
and shared data in the sector in a way that maximises value for energy customers,
opportunities for companies, and provides further benefits to society such as
delivering on net zero and fuel poverty commitments.
10
This could be done by looking
at what data infrastructure in the energy sector could becomemore open.
Data infrastructureconsists of data assets such asdatasets, registers and common
identifiers like metadata. It also includes the standards and technologies used to
curate and provide access to those data assets and the guidance and policies that
inform the use and management of data assets. It can also include the organisations
that govern the data infrastructure and has to involve the communities involved in
contributing to or maintaining it; and those who are impacted by decisions that are
made using it.
11
The ‘Data for good’ system data exchangeinitiative aims to have
organisations work together to improve access to energy data infrastructure, starting
with improving access to its own smart meter system data.
Smart meters are devices which record the amount of gas and electricity used,
usually every 30 minutes. They aim to create opportunities for making the grid
smarter and to offer new products to consumers, such as time-of-use tariffs. Smart
meters enable energy suppliers to provide accurate billing and export tariffs through
measurement of energy use and generation. In addition, messages can be sent to the
meter, as well as taking readings from it – this enables a whole range of new
functionality including dynamic (time of use) tariffs, change of supplier and load
control/demand side response services.
Smart meter system data is not the same as energy consumption data. The term
‘systems data’ can include data about the device itself, high level data about
transactions between the energy supplier and customer, and data about the
registration of the device, like whether it has been installed in a domestic or
non-domestic location. The ‘Data for good’ initiative focuses on what more can be
done with more open smart meter system data infrastructure.
11
Dodds, L. & Wells, P. (2019) The State of Open Data: Data Infrastructure
https://www.stateofopendata.od4d.net/chapters/issues/data-infrastructure.html
10
Data Communications Company (2021), ‘Data for good’,
https://www.smartdcc.co.uk/media/4699/21037-dcc-data-for-good-paper_v8-final.pdf
9
Gov.UK (2019), ‘Modernising Energy Data’,https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/modernising-energy-data
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem6

Image credit:Data for Good,Data CommunicationsCompany
As of June 2021 there aremore than 12 million connectedmetersinstalled and
enrolled onto the DCC's nationwide secure network. Up to 470 million messages are
securely encrypted and sent to and from homes and small businesses every month.
12
Increased access to this smart meter data infrastructure, including identifiers,
standards, and the metadata to closed or shared data, could boost innovation in the
sector that benefits not just energy customers, but Great Britain and beyond.
12
Data Communications Company (2021), ‘Data for good’,
https://www.smartdcc.co.uk/media/4699/21037-dcc-data-for-good-paper_v8-final.pdf
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem7

The smart meter data
ecosystem
At a high level, the UK smart meter system is like a big federated database: the
individual meters store and submit data, with access to that database being governed
by DCC. The authorised users of that network build and maintain their own local
caches of data, to support their businesses and customers. Given the relative
complexity of the smart data ecosystem, it can be difficult to picture how data is
shared between stakeholders.
At the ODI, we use an approach called data ecosystem mapping to help people
understand how value is being created from data within a data ecosystem. A data
ecosystem map identifies the key data stewards and users, the relationships between
them and the different roles they play. In our initial collaboration with the DCC, we
created a data ecosystem map which represents what the smart meter data
ecosystem might look like when mapped against a specific use case, like addressing
fuel poverty.
Potential DCC fuel poverty use case data ecosystem map.
Interactive kumu map. N.B. this map is hypotheticaland a simplified version of the
potential smart meter system data ecosystem.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem8

Some of the key interactions within this potential data ecosystem map include:
●
DCC provides access to system data to a variety of approved organisations
for monitoring and research purposes such as academia, researchers,
regulators and government. The research community could provide valuable
insights into the system back to DCC for this purpose, while the government
and regulators keep an eye on this important piece of national data
infrastructure.
●
DCC provides access to system data to approved data intermediaries such
as analytics companies that can combine this data with other available data
and provide additional services and insights to key ecosystem stakeholders
such as local authorities, housing associations and energy suppliers.
●
These stakeholders could then use these advanced analytics, which include
smart meter system data, to plan interventions in the forms of advice, insights
or new services in order to combat fuel poverty in households currently in
vulnerable circumstances.
Understanding the smart meter data ecosystem was an important first step in helping
us to understand which stakeholders needed to be involved in future conversations
about the smart meter system data exchange and what some of the barriers might be
that prevent data from being accessed by the wider energy sector.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem9

Workshop format and
attendance
The ODI team ran two workshops, hosting participants from a variety of backgrounds
such as potential data users (such as nonprofits and startups from both within and
outside the energy sector), data providers (including representative energy sector
trade bodies), industry bodies, consumer advocacy groups, thinktanks and
government. The workshops were convened in an early exploratory manner to help
better understand the potential for DCC’s ‘Data for good’ system data exchange
initiative, and were designed to not be exhaustive in scope.
The data users’ workshop was convened to explore the high value socioeconomic
uses of system data in the ecosystem, the current data infrastructure underpinning
the ecosystem, and the opportunities to increase value through new partnerships,
operating models or data infrastructure.
The public considerations workshop focussed on using a data ethics and privacy lens
to align the key priorities in the market, understand the key risks and barriers to an
initiative targeting these priorities and develop mitigation strategies.
In both workshops, UrbanTide gave an overview of their in-development solution,
uSmartZero – funded through Modernising Energy Data Applications, a BEIS and
Ofgem sponsored competition funded by UKRI. DCC is participating in the feasibility
study as part of a consortium. The project is exploring how smart meter system data
at an aggregated level, when combined with other data sets, can help to identify
households in or at a risk of fuel poverty.
Participants answered a series of questions and were asked to rank or respond using
the Sli.do voting system. This was followed by discussion enabling participants to
provide more detail to their answers.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem10

Use cases for smart
meter system data
As a precursor to the work with the ODI, DCC has been exploring potential use cases
for smart meter system data. Working with the Connected Places Catapult and as a
participant to the Smart Meter Public Interest Advisory Group,  a number of use cases
have arisen where smart meter system data could provide significant value.
In 2020, DCC reviewed the Innovate UK Local Energy Data Innovation project, led by
Regen SW as a further source ofuse casesthat couldbe underpinned by improved
access to smart meter system data.
13
These combined sources of use cases covered a number of themes including:
●
Achieving net zero and local decarbonisation
●
Addressingconsumer vulnerability and fuel poverty
●
Optimising efficiency and reducing costs arounddomesticenergy and bills
●
Improving the infrastructure forelectric vehicles(EV)
●
Optimising and decarbonisingenergy generation
●
Optimisingenergy networks
●
Improvingenergy services and their supply arrangements
●
Improvingflexibility services
●
Joining up utilitiesto find cross-sector efficiencybetween energy and water
●
Better understanding the links between energy andpublic healthand
improving public health outcomes
Across both workshops achieving net zero and local decarbonisation, addressing
consumer vulnerability and fuel poverty and optimising and decarbonising energy
generation came out as the top three choices. This clearly communicates that
stakeholders across the energy data ecosystem are aligned on the major priorities for
the energy sector – switching to renewable energy and addressing financial
vulnerability.
Other use cases chosen in the top five were focused on EV and domestic energy in
the data users’ workshop, and domestic energy and public health in the public
considerations workshop.
The participants were also asked for additional use cases they felt were not included
in the themes presented. These included:
●
improving efficiency and decarbonisation specifically in heat provision and
heat pump adoption
●
targeting retrofitting in private rental sector (beyond current work in social
housing)
13
Regen (2020), “Local Energy Data Innovation”,
https://www.regen.co.uk/publications/local-energy-data-innovation/
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem11

●
optimising the energy system for the agriculture industry
●
provide data for policy planning and measuring the impact of major events
(such as a pandemic) on energy use
●
informing decarbonisation strategies for commercial premises.
Key stakeholders
Participants were asked to identify the key ecosystem stakeholders that needed to be
involved in the ‘Data for good’ programme in order to deliver on the prioritised use
cases. Answers fell broadly into three categories: primary energy sector stakeholders,
secondary energy sector stakeholders and other stakeholders.
Primary energy sector stakeholders are those delivering energy and energy related
services through the entire supply chain. This included energy producers, distributors
and organisations providing additional services. This also included regulators like
Ofgem, industry bodies like the Energy Savings Trust and government organisations
like BEIS. This also included energy consumers themselves.
Secondary energy sector stakeholders are those connected more loosely to the
energy sector but have a direct impact. This included local authorities, consumer
groups, housing providers and the construction sector, and universities.
Finally, there were a few organisations that can be seen as removed from the energy
sector but with the potential to play a big role in the wider smart meter system data
ecosystem. This included data focussed organisations such as data intermediaries
with experience in other similar sectors, especially the open banking ecosystem. Civil
society organisations (CSOs) connected to the outcomes of these use case themes
and the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) were also mentioned.
Sustainable data access
The financial sustainability of data access ensures that the benefits from that access
continue to flow to beneficiaries. Our research onsustainable data accesshas shown
how important this is, and the various ways organisations usually manage this.
DCC is proposing to maximise data access at the lowest possible cost required to
maintain financial sustainability. Data will be provided free where possible.
In our data users’ workshop we sought feedback about some of these methods:
●
Membership fees
●
Subscription fees
●
Usage fees
●
Free + premium/tiered access
●
Free + 'over-the-top' services
Providing a ‘tiered freemium access’ model was a popular option, with most
respondents believing that there should be some free access, and the ability to either
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem12

price discriminate based on the service requested (such as premium APIs) or the
organisation requesting access (such as free for nonprofits and a progressive fee
system for the private sector).
Technical infrastructure
Finally, data users were asked what types of technical infrastructure would help
enable innovation, trust and value in the smart meter system data ecosystem.
Responses included:
●
Open licences (such as Creative Commons)
●
Well-documented APIs
●
Developer sandboxes
●
A community of users
●
A query tool
●
Codes of practice
●
Metadata
●
Standardised consent manager
Many of these types of infrastructure have been successfully used in other data
access initiatives such asopen banking, includingAPI specifications, security profiles
and other guidelines.
14
Existing initiatives such asopen banking and Open Energy
could provide a model for how DCC may want to implement similar standards across
‘Data for good’.
14
Open Banking (2019), ‘Welcome to the Open Banking Standard’,https://standards.openbanking.org.uk/
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem13

Barriers, risks and
mitigations for smart
meter system data
All data access initiatives come with inherent risks. Data should be as open as
possible, but to do so without the proper safeguards to security and privacy to
mitigate those risks can harm people and lead to a loss of trust in data sharing.
The main risks and concerns voiced by the workshop participants echoed many that
rightly coincide with other similar initiatives. Concerns included that privacy may not
be sufficient or data may be de-anonymised; that data may be used inappropriately
such as with discriminatory services; and typical fears around security and accuracy.
Some important risks and barriers that surfaced outside of typical fears focused
primarily on digital exclusion. Digital literacy and understanding consent are critical
components to ensure equitable benefits from a data access initiative. There were
also concerns that people without smart meters would not accrue benefits.
Regarding the issue of fuel poverty there were concerns that in focusing overly on the
energy sector or ‘fuel poverty’, a siloing of data or effort could occur that doesn’t
address the fact that poverty is not relegated to just a single sector of the economy.
Building trust: mitigating risks and equitable
benefits
There are risks around ensuring that the benefits from this initiative are realised and
are equitably distributed, and participants identified several ways to mitigate these
risks. These activities help ensuretrustworthy dataaccessby focusing on consent,
redress and clear, active communication.
As in all data access initiatives, consent is critical to building a trustworthy data
ecosystem. Consent can never be fully informed, for reasons including the difficulty in
anticipating all potential uses of data, but clearly communicating the consent
mechanisms, intended benefits of the initiative, the risks and how to access redress
is best practice for data governance. Participants also noted that public engagement
should be represented by a diverse group to ensure equitable support.
Participants felt that data users must play an active role in demonstrating to
consumers that their use of data aims to provide a public benefit, as consumers are
likely to be most concerned with why data about them is being shared. This aligns
with our previous research on the topic, ‘About DataAbout Us’ produced with the
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem14

RSA and Luminate, which found that ‘people are happy to share data about them for
societal benefits, but want to understand and have a say in what it is used for.’
15
Participants also suggested that one of the best ways to build trust was to prove the
impact with a small pilot project, possibly in a single locality and scale up from there.
This approach is being deployed with Open Energy, which may prove instructive.
Other means of ensuring trust in the system included defining metrics and monitoring
them against audits, using widely accepted standards, citizens assemblies and an
ethics board.
15
Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data About Us: ‘the people’ know and care more than they are given credit
for’,
https://theodi.org/article/data-about-us-the-people-know-and-care-more-than-they-are-given-credit-for/
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem15

Recommendations
It takes a lot of work to create an open, trustworthy data ecosystem and DCC is well
positioned to begin that journey with the system data exchange initiative described in
the ‘Data for good’ discussion paper. The smart meter data ecosystem is poised for
such a data access initiative, with interest from end users, data users and providers,
as well as similar trends across the energy sector and beyond. Broadly speaking we
believe that DCC identifying as a data institution and the ‘Data for good’ initiative as a
data access initiative will help both align activities and priorities, as well as help
deliver on intended outcomes.
We recommend the following key steps:
●
Convene an advisory group of different industry representatives to develop a
programme of activity for further discovery and implementation, in a similar
way to the Open Energy Advisory Groups led by Icebreaker One
○
Seek buy-in from the industry’s main service providers, such as
energy suppliers and distribution network operators (DNOs), to
ensure a smooth implementation and achievement of goals
○
Confer with key representatives from other data initiatives in the
communications, water, and banking sectors to learn best practice
and where pitfalls may exist. Ensure alignment as much as possible
with the work done by the BEIS Smart Data team and the Open
Energy initiative.
○
Run workshops with this group focussing on data ethics, sustainable
data access, building trust, technical infrastructure and other key
themes that have surfaced throughout the initial work.
●
Consider how to incorporate the views of the public and customers in
governance and access, given the ‘public good’ designation of the data
infrastructure. Participants clearly outlined the need for public transparency
and outreach regarding consent, risks, benefits and other aspects. The
INSIGHT data institutionfound success in having arobustpatient and public
involvement programme.
●
Explore ways to stimulate and encourage further work on specific use cases
such as what is being done with uSmartZero. Data users and consumer and
civil society organisations showed clearly that net zero, fuel poverty and
improved energy services are key areas to develop these use cases. This
might involve engaging in discovery projects, delivering hackdays or
exploring options for stimulus funding for small projects.
●
In the finance sector, open banking has already demonstrated that a
standardised set of APIs, licensing and approach to managing access and
consent can help to drive innovation in a way that is good for consumers.
Working with industry stakeholders and data users to develop some of the
technical infrastructure outlined in the findings, such as open standards and
APIs, ensuring alignment with the Open Energy standards.
●
Promote and sponsor further engagement and research to understand the
data ecosystem better, such as an appropriatemodelfor data access, such
as adatainstitution for data that cannot be openlypublished. Ensure that the
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem16

infrastructure and financial costs for data users to meet the necessary
technical, security and audit requirements for access are not prohibitive.
●
Ensure that the sustainability of the funding model is proportionate to firm
size, stimulating innovation from smaller organisations, nonprofits and
academia, and not restrictive to only large private sector organisations and
government.
●
Following the Energy Data Task Force recommendation of data being
‘presumed open’, publish data and information openly wherever possible,
such as about the Smart Energy Code, the different types of smart meters,
and the progress of the initiative and national rollout itself. This will help
engender trust in the overall programme.
In addition to our recommendations for DCC, we believe that the wider ecosystem of
stakeholders, such as data users and providers, civil society, government and
regulators have a role to play. Our recommendations for these stakeholders are as
follows:
Data users
●
Engage with DCC and other data providers in the energy sector to help them
identify and prioritise use casesfor smart metersystem data.
●
Work with DCC to inform the creation of a model fordata access that is
both sustainable and equitable.
●
When using smart meter system data, make sure tocommunicatethe
public benefitsof this data use as openly as possible.
Data providers (including energy suppliers and DNOs)
●
Consider how the data collected could be useful in addressing social,
economic and environmental challenges. Work with ecosystem partners to
develop valuable use casesusing this data.
●
Explore how tomake this data more availablethroughsustainable and
trustworthy data access models.
Civil society
●
Work with DCC and other smart meter ecosystem stakeholders toevaluate
the access, use and sharing of smart meter system data through an
ethics lens. Help ensure that value is flowing throughthe ecosystem
equitably, especially towards people in vulnerable situations, and that risks
are mitigated as much as possible.
●
Work with the public toidentify common challengesthat could be
addressed through improved access to smart meter data.
Government and regulators
●
Work with DCC and other energy stakeholders toensurethat regulations
support access to smart meter datawhere appropriate,including
mechanisms for redress, and that this is communicated to clearly to the
public.
●
As a longer term objective,consider making fundingavailable to support
data users in addressing social, economic and environmental challenges
using smart meter data, through challenges and innovation programmes.
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem17

Appendix 1: The value of
sharing data
Businesses can create value by using third-party data to develop new products and
services. Our research has shown that they can unlock additional value by sharing
data they have collected.
16
Increasing access to dataheld in the private sector has
proven benefits to businesses in many ways, including:
●
Improving supply chain efficiency
17
●
Increasing market reach
18
●
Facilitatingbenchmarking and market insights
19
●
Building trust
20
●
Improving efficiencies throughopen innovation
21
, includingwithinregulated
markets
22
●
Collaborating toaddress sector-wide challengessuchas those found in the
energy sector
23
Our research with the Bennett Institute at the University of Cambridge onthe value of
datahas shown that despite increasing access to databeing an important way to
unlock its wider economic and social benefits, there are various market failures
around data and the data economy that mean data sharing initiatives will not
necessarily emerge on their own.
24
24
Open Data Institute & Nuffield Foundation (2020), ‘Valuing data: foundations for data policy’,
https://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/project/valuing-data-foundations-for-data-policy
23
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data to address sector challenges’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-address-sector-challenges/
22
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data in regulated environments’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-in-regulated-environments/
21
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data to drive open innovation’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-drive-open-innovation/
20
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data to build trust’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-build-trust/
19
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data for benchmarking and insights’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-for-benchmarking-and-insights/
18
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data for improving market reach’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-for-improving-market-reach/
17
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data in supply chain optimisation’,
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-in-supply-chain-optimisation/
16
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Report: Sharing data to create value in the private sector’,
https://theodi.org/article/report-sharing-data-to-create-value-in-the-private-sector/
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem18

Appendix 2: Data access
initiatives in other
sectors
Currently under the banner ofSmart Data, in 2019,a data portability strategy was
published as part of the UK Industrial Strategy. This proposed that greater access to
data would foster innovation to improve consumer outcomes by:
○
accelerating the development of innovative data-driven services in
consumer markets
○
using data and technology to help vulnerable consumers
○
ensuring consumers and their data are protected.
25
Smart Data, data portability and data access initiatives, including the work being
done in the energy sector by BEIS, Ofgem and Icebreaker One, include initiatives to
increase access to data in a variety of sectors:
●
Open bankingallows retail banking customers to share account and
transaction data with trusted partners. When securely shared, the data can
be used to build useful services such as account aggregation and personal
financial management.
26
●
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is looking to expand this to other
financial data sources, including savings, investments, mortgages and
pensions under the banner ofopen finance.
27
Of thesethePensions
Dashboardbeing led by the Money and Pensions Service(MaPS) is the most
mature.
28
●
Open communicationswould enable people and businessesto share data
about their use of telecoms services, held by their providers, with third parties
who could help them navigate the market and get a better deal.
29
Our first
look intoopen APIs in the telecoms industrydemonstratedthat there is
29
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Open Communications: An open trustworthy data ecosystem for the
telecommunications sector’,
https://theodi.org/article/open-communications-an-open-trustworthy-data-ecosystem-for-the-telecommunicati
ons-sector-report/
28
Pensions Dashboard Programme (2021), ‘UK Pensions Dashboard’,
https://www.pensionsdashboardsprogramme.org.uk/
27
Open Data Institute (2020), ‘The Financial Conduct Authority’s call for input on open
finance: ODI response’,
https://theodi.org/article/the-financial-conduct-authoritys-call-for-input-on-open-finance-odi
-response/
26
Open Data Institute (2019), ‘How far Open Banking has come: our five takeaways’,
https://theodi.org/article/how-far-open-banking-has-come-our-five-takeaways
25
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2019), ‘Smart Data: Putting
consumers in control of their data and enabling innovation’,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/808272/Smart-Data-Consultation.pdf
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem19

potential to enable new products and services that meet the needs of a wide
set of users.
30
●
Though not a formal Smart Data initiative, theOpenActiveprogramme from
Sport England and the ODI is currently helping the sports and leisure sector
adopt data standards and publish open data with the hope of getting more
people in England active.
●
Similarly, there have been initiatives in thetransport
31
andhealth
32
sectors to
improve access to data about transport users and patients in trustworthy and
secure ways.
32
Open Data Institute (2020), “Applying new models of data stewardship to health and care data [report]”,
https://theodi.org/article/applying-new-models-of-data-stewardship-to-health-and-care-data-report/
31
Open Data Institute (2018), “Personal data in transport: exploring a framework for the future (report)”,
https://theodi.org/article/personal-data-in-transport-exploring-a-framework-for-the-future-report/
30
Projects by IF (2018), ‘Open APIs in the Telecoms Industry’,
https://openapis.projectsbyif.com/
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem20

Appendix 3: Additional
resources
●
TheData Landscape Playbook, which helps organisationsinvolved indata
access initiatives— collaborative programmes thatfocus on addressing
social, environmental or economic challenges by improving access to data —
to prioritise and plan their initial activities to design or strengthen data
infrastructure
●
TheTrustworthy Data Stewardship Guidebookhas beencreated to help
organisations assess, build and demonstrate both their trust and their
trustworthiness
●
TheSustainable Data Access Workbookwhich supportsorganisations that
steward data to make better decisions about their revenue models
●
Mapping data ecosystemsmethodology andtool– a toolfor documenting
and mapping data ecosystems
●
Open standards for the UK energy sector
●
Anonymisation and open data: An introduction to managing the risk of
re-identification
●
Open Standards for Data- This guidebook helps peopleand organisations
create, develop and adopt open standards for data.
●
Data sharing in the private sector- includes casestudies on businesses
gaining value from increasing access to data they hold and asummary report
●
The Value of Data report- exploring ideas aroundhow to effectively and
ethically tap into the value of data
Open Data Institute | June 2021Improving data access in the UK smart meter data ecosystem21