

 

 
 
Contents 
 
About3 
Executive summary4 
Background: school closures during emergency lockdowns5 
Project design7 
Research questions7 
Methods and methodology8 
Quantitative survey8 
Qualitative interviews8 
Online forums: data from Mumsnet9 
Data from Barnardo’s9 
Children and young people9 
Limitations of the data10 
Sharing our research data11 
Impact of lockdown on educational attainment13 
Previous research13 
Teachers’ perspectives on children’s academic performance15 
Differences by pupil characteristics16 
Learning experiences during lockdown: views from children, 
parents/carers and teachers18 
Parents’ discussions during lockdown: insights from Mumsnet data20 
Parents’ perspectives from interviews22 
Teachers’ perspectives on children’s learning23 
Impact of lockdown on socioeconomic circumstances and emotional 
wellbeing25 
Impact on children’s socioeconomic provision/circumstances25 
Teachers’ support for children during lockdown26 
Impact of lockdown on children’s mental health and wellbeing27 
Data from the Barnardo’s See, Hear, Respond Partnership28 
Increasing demand for support28 
The role of schools in referrals30 
Mental health, isolation and loneliness31 
Priority groups32 
Data on parents/carers’ mental health: indications from Mumsnet forums
34 
Teachers’ mental health and wellbeing35 
Conclusions and recommendations38 
Conclusion38 
Recommendations38 
Bibliography40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   2 

 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute (ODI), 
and published in November 2020.  
 
The report’s lead author is Christine Singer, with guidance from Professor Jeanette 
Steemers, King's College University and Professor Cynthia Carter, Cardiff 
University. The research for this project was carried out by the ODI, in collaboration 
with three partners: ​ODI Leeds​, a node of the ODI, responsible for the data 
sourcing, analysis and the open data publication; ​Allegory​, a strategic 
communication agency that has worked with the ODI for eight years and is 
responsible for the research project management and communications; ​and ​MyEd 
Limited​, a startup that delivered the research qualitative interviews. 
 
We would like to thank the ODI’s Louise Burke, Mahlet (Milly) Zimeta, Jeni Tennison 
and Roger Hampson for their guidance and support, and Ellen Goodman for 
project management. We would also like to thank Emma Thwaites, Charlotte 
McLeod (Project Lead), Alex Vryzakis, Kristin Hadland and Emma Foster from 
Allegory; Giles Dring and Patrick Lake from ODI Leeds; Harmil Pardesi, Professor 
Upkar Pardesi and Joy Krishnamoorthy from MyEd; and Christian Howes for 
assisting with data visualisation. 
 
November 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   3 

 
 
Executive summary 
 
The coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic has created new and sudden challenges for 
the education sector. Extended school closures during lockdown and beyond 
have put increasing pressure on teachers, parents/carers and pupils. Yet little data 
exists on the educational and psychological impacts of periods of enforced 
homeschooling.  
 
Between September and October 2020, the ODI carried out a rapid-response pilot 
study that investigated what current data could tell us about education during the 
coronavirus pandemic. It combined analyses of shared and open data with 
targeted quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews, and looked at what these 
could tell us about the challenges faced by children, teachers and families. It 
collected and analysed data from a variety of sources, including the government, 
academia and the third sector. These data sources were combined with analyses 
of data shared with us from Barnardo’s, Mumsnet and Teacher Tapp to support 
the research findings. The data analysis and visualisations produced as part of 
this project are publicly accessible via an ​interactive web page​. 
 
The ODI project team helped Barnardo’s to curate data they hold into something 
that could be safely published as open data. We also worked with Mumsnet to 
understand – at an aggregate level – discussions taking place on its forums. As 
our analyses of Barnardo’s and Mumsnet datasets show, third-sector 
organisations and social-media platforms that aggregate data they hold – and 
make it public in a safe and ethical way – can assist other organisations with 
public-interest research, such as identifying how vulnerable children can be 
monitored and supported.  
 
All the data sources we looked at agree that emergency school closures due to 
coronavirus have led to differences in educational progress and learning between 
pupils from different backgrounds. Teachers, in turn, have been tasked with 
identifying and supporting pupils who have fallen behind with their learning and 
re-teaching knowledge from before lockdown. Furthermore, emergency school 
closures have had adverse impacts on the social, economic and emotional 
wellbeing of some children and families, and teachers are grappling with 
increased work-related anxiety.  
 
As a rapid-response pilot project, this research has limitations, including biases in 
the users of digital platforms and a small data sample of 29 interviews, carried out 
in the West Midlands area. This research is not comprehensive and not 
representative of the UK as a whole, and, like all evidence, should be interpreted 
carefully. Addressing these data gaps, which in turn can reinforce existing social 
inequalities, is both urgent and necessary in future research. 
 
This project seeks to inspire further research on the impact of coronavirus using 
new data sources for rapid analysis, and to provide incentives for better 
investment in our data infrastructure to support emergency responses in the 
education sector and beyond. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   4 

 
 
Background: school 
closures during 
emergency lockdowns 
When the coronavirus pandemic broke out in the UK, the daily lives of teachers, 
parents and pupils abruptly changed. Schools closed to the majority of pupils at 
the end of March 2020. The exceptions were children of key workers and children 
assessed as vulnerable – this includes looked-after children, children who have an 
education, health and care plan whose needs can be as safely or more safely met 
in the educational environment, and those who have been assessed as ‘otherwise 
vulnerable’.  Teachers and school leaders had to rapidly find new ways to deliver 
1
learning and pastoral care (​the provision schools make to ensure the physical and 
emotional welfare of pupils​) while children and families grappled with finding ways 
to study from home. 
 
Schools reopened to all children in the UK in September 2020, but much about 
the upcoming school year remains uncertain, including assessments, social 
distancing measures, self-isolation requirements and the unknown long-term 
effects of lockdown on the mental health of pupils, families and teachers. Recent 
spikes in coronavirus infection rates have already led to a pattern of varied, 
short-notice emergency lockdowns at local, regional and national levels, and a 
new nationwide lockdown in England was introduced just days before the 
publication of this report. Wales had already gone into a two-week firebreak 
lockdown, and Scotland had separately introduced further restrictions on 2 
November 2020. 
 
Existing research has provided valuable insights into the impact of school closures 
during the first nationwide lockdown on parents/carers, pupils and teachers. 
Studies have identified a range of challenges: a gap in learning and educational 
progress between economically advantaged and disadvantaged children; 
2
teachers struggling with work-related anxiety and mental health; teaching and 
3
technical issues with online learning; and growing evidence of the detrimental 
4
impact of school closures on children’s emotional wellbeing. 
5
 
However,​ ​existing research is – with some exceptions – on average published 
6
two-to-three months after data collection has been carried out, leading to a lack of 
timely data during this constantly evolving situation. There are also gaps in the 
data on how the impact on education has changed at different points since the 
coronavirus outbreak in March. Moreover, the source data – data that has not 
1
 ​UK government (2020), ​Coronavirus (COVID-19): safeguarding in schools, colleges and other 
providers 
2
 Child Poverty Action Group (2020), ‘​The Cost of Learning in Lockdown: family experiences of school 
closures​’  
3
 Teacher Tapp, UCL Social Research Institute, UCL CEPEO (2020), ‘​How did the early stages of the 
COVID-19 pandemic affect teacher wellbeing?’  
4
 Beng, H. S. and Wardle, L. (2020), ‘​Teachers’ wellbeing and workload during Covid-19 lockdown​’. 
Durham University and School Zone 
5
 Barnardo's (2020) ‘​Time for a Clean Slate: Children’s Mental Health at the Heart of Education​’. 
Barnardo's 
6
 Office for National Statistics (2020). ​Coronavirus and the social impacts on Great Britain: 16 October 
2020 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   5 

 
 
been processed for use and upon which research is based – is often not 
published and is therefore not accessible to other researchers. 
 
During an unpredictable crisis like this, access to up-to-the-minute data is more 
important than ever. Government, teachers, headteachers and policymakers 
urgently need access to accurate, current data to understand how periods away 
from school have affected, and are affecting, pupils’ learning and emotional 
wellbeing. Having access to reliably updated data available would help with the 
development of strategies to assist those children who are hit hardest by 
emergency school closures due to coronavirus.  
 
Based on a small research sample, this pilot study sought to investigate the data 
that exists on the impact of the lockdown on education; what we could tell from 
this data; whether this data is both current and publicly available; and where more 
data is urgently needed.  
 
This report highlights the need for further research and investment in data 
infrastructure in the education sector, to provide information and inform decision 
making in a rapidly evolving situation. 
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   6 

 
 
Project design  
Research questions 
 
The ODI started this pilot project with desk research in the following areas: 
●Existing published research on the key challenges faced by 
parents/carers, children and teachers during periods of enforced 
homeschooling and ‘blended learning’ – a combination of online and 
offline teaching methods (March–November 2020) 
●Identifying gaps in data within this existing research 
●Education and mental-health data landscape 
●Data needs and challenges to support organisations working with schools, 
teachers, parents/carers and children 
 
We then established the following research questions: 
 
 
 
 
To explore these questions, our research aimed to: 
 
●collect and analyse timely data from different sectors (government, 
private, third and academic) that demonstrates the key challenges of 
emergency school closures experienced by parents/carers, pupils and 
teachers during the coronavirus pandemic 
●collect data that shows how emergency school closures had different 
impacts on different groups of children and families 
●highlight relevant data that is currently available for analysis; identify gaps 
in the data; and encourage/facilitate the wider sharing of the data from 
this research to make further analyses possible. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   7 
What are the main challenges experienced by parents/carers, teachers and 
children during periods of enforced homeschooling and blended learning 
(March–November 2020), and how can good data infrastructure help 
schools and other organisations in monitoring, understanding and 
addressing these challenges, and in providing direct, real-time support to 
parents/carers, teachers and children? 
  
Sub-questions: 
1.What do teachers, parents/carers and pupils at primary and 
secondary schools identify as the main challenges of enforced 
homeschooling during the coronavirus pandemic, specifically in 
relation to: 
a.Homeschooling, including online and blended learning?  
b.Coping emotionally with the disruption to education? 
2.How do these challenges differ by socio-economic backgrounds of 
parents/carers and pupils? 
3.What, if any, data already exists in the UK that enables us to 
answer these questions?  
a.How can this data be made widely accessible?  
b.What data is missing? 

 
 
 
Methods and methodology  
Research findings should be given weight proportionate to the representativeness 
and robustness of the data they are based on. In this section, we describe some 
of the features of the data we have used in this research that influence how it 
should be interpreted. Further details can be found in the ODI Data Ethics Canvas 
which accompanies this report. The Data Ethics Canvas was completed to help 
7
explore the implications of the use of data in this research. 
 
Quantitative survey  
The ODI collaborated with Teacher Tapp (an app that asks teachers daily 
8
questions to get their opinions on aspects of school life and education) to carry 
out a quantitative survey. Teacher Tapp asked teachers across England three 
survey questions, two on 20 October 2020 and one on 27 October 2020, to further 
test the findings from the open and shared datasets. The Teacher Tapp survey 
panel comprises 9,000 teachers across the state and private sectors in England. 
Via an app, and after providing valid credentials, teachers sign up to receive three 
multiple-choice questions each day at 3:30pm. Teachers are recruited to the panel 
via social and traditional media, promotion at professional development events, 
and word of mouth in schools. 
 
The ODI received an aggregated version of this data from Teacher Tapp, including 
some statistical characterisation of the teachers who responded. This data is 
aggregated and anonymised, as outlined in the ODI Data Ethics Canvas that 
accompanies this report. 
9
  
Qualitative interviews 
The ODI’s research partner, MyEd, carried out 29 interviews. These were with 
teachers (10 interviews), parents/carers (10 interviews) and pupils (aged 13–18 
years; nine interviews) located mainly in the West Midlands area. MyEd runs an 
open data platform that helps parents and students search for nurseries, schools, 
colleges, universities and courses.  
 
The research MyEd carried out for this project is also contributing to an Innovate 
UK-funded project for the development of MyEd Open School, aimed at 
connecting teachers with their pupils to enable the continuity of formal structured 
education.  
10
 
Interviewees were recruited through MyEd’s networks and contacts with schools. 
MyEd carried out the interviews remotely, by phone or video call. Interview 
participants were told the purpose of the research and their right to withdraw from 
it at any point. Participation was entirely voluntary.  
 
MyEd sought written informed consent from parents/carers of young people under 
18 years to carry out the interviews and publish them in this report.  
 
Online forums: data from Mumsnet 
During this project, we collaborated with Mumsnet, the largest parenting website 
in the UK. Its discussion boards, Mumsnet Talk, receive over seven million unique 
visitors per month. Mumsnet granted the research team access to anonymised 
11
7
 ODI (2020), ​Data on children in lockdown - Data Ethics Canvas 
8
  Education Intelligence Ltd (2020), ​TeacherTapp 
9
 ​ODI (2020), ​Data on children in lockdown - Data Ethics Canvas 
10
 UK government (2020), ​Innovate UK - GOV.UK  
11
 Mumsnet (2020), ‘​About us​’ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   8 

 
 
data and forum search tools for one week (19–23 October 2020). This was the first 
time Mumsnet had shared their data for analysis purposes with another 
organisation. 
 
The dataset was analysed via both an inductive and a deductive approach. We 
identified the 10 most frequent terms used by Mumsnet users at different points in 
time – before and during lockdown, and when schools reopened to all pupils 
(January, April and September 2020, respectively). We also searched for key 
terms used by people posting on Mumsnet relating to the research questions (eg 
‘learning’, ‘safe’, ‘mental health’), across the forums, and how frequently they were 
used during January, April and September. This analysis aimed to obtain a sense 
of how parents/carers’ discussions and concerns changed over time, and how 
these concerns related to the findings from our interviews and surveys.  
 
Data from Barnardo’s 
We sourced data in collaboration with the Barnardo’s See, Hear, Respond 
Partnership. Barnardo’s shared aggregated data on its weekly referrals to the 
12
See, Hear, Respond service. By late October, the See, Hear, Respond Partnership 
was delivering support to more than 20,000 children and young people. 
Barnardo’s shared almost 7,000 records from this dataset with the ODI, which 
covered the period from 17 June 2020 (when the programme was launched) to 12 
October 2020.  
 
Information in each record includes location (at local authority level), week of 
referral, reason(s) for referral (one or more, as assessed by worker triage), priority 
group(s) (as assessed by worker triage) and referral channel. In addition, a series 
of operational details were provided, which we have not analysed due to the time 
limitations of this project (status, outcome).  
 
Referrals were assigned a random ID in the shared data, which means it is not 
possible to identify a child who is referred to the service multiple times. The ID is 
not used in the aggregations. The only conceivable risk to identifying a child would 
be someone in a region with an unusual combination of needs. To mitigate this 
risk, we did not aggregate by need or priority group, which could be tied back to a 
record. Each group and reason for intervention was counted independently. 
 
Children and young people 
Children and young people need particular protection when organisations and 
researchers are collecting and processing personal data about them, because 
they may be less aware of the risks involved. As outlined in the ODI Data Ethics 
13
Canvas that accompanies this report, we considered the need to protect data 
about children and young people from the outset of the research, and designed 
our project with this in mind, for example, by deciding not to publicly share any 
interviews that were carried out with young people (aged 13–18 years) and by 
sourcing only aggregated, anonymised data on children from other organisations.  
Confidentiality, and compliance with the data protection principles, has to be 
central to all processing of children’s personal data. 
14
Limitations of the data 
This pilot research was carried out over a short time period (five weeks), which 
allowed for sourcing, analysing and publishing timely data that was collected within 
one month prior to the publication of this report.  
12
 Barnardo’s (2020), ​See, Hear, Respond Partnership 
13
 Information Commissioner’s Office (2020), ​Children: data protection 
14
 ​ibid. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   9 

 
 
 
Given the limited time and resources available for this project, the findings are 
based on a small sample of research participants who took part in the Teacher 
Tapp survey questions and qualitative interviews. MyEd’s interviews were carried 
out mainly in the West Midlands region. Moreover, the Teacher Tapp survey panel 
constitutes teachers from England only. The data collected through interviews and 
the survey may, therefore, not be representative of other regions of the UK. 
 
Furthermore, the results of the Teacher Tapp survey represent teachers’ current 
judgements of their pupils’ performance rather than standardised assessment 
results. While teachers typically have a good understanding of their pupils’ 
progress, teachers’ assessments could, in some circumstances, be subject to bias 
related to pupils’ gender, ethnicity, socio-economic status and special needs. The 
findings of the survey should, therefore, be interpreted as subjective teacher 
estimates about pupils’ current academic progress, rather than an exact picture of 
their skills and knowledge.  
15
 
With the limited time available, it was also challenging for the interviewers to recruit 
interviewees from families with low socioeconomic status, which means that the 
perspectives of these families are, for the most part, absent from the current 
research sample. This gap in our data highlights the need to collect more data on 
different socio-economic groups, as a lack of information on the perspectives of 
families from low socio-economic status could potentially reinforce marginalisation.  
 
Our research was conducted via digital media platforms, including online surveys, 
online forum research and video calls. Therefore, digital exclusion – when people 
are unable to, or choose not to, engage with digital platforms – presents a 
significant risk of inequality and bias in the data we collected. To an extent, digital 
16
exclusion is linked to socioeconomic status, as the ability to access and engage 
with digital platforms, and the skills required to use digital tools fully, increases with 
income. In 2019, 51% of households earning between £6,000 and £10,000 had 
access to the internet at home, compared with 99% of households with an income 
of £40,000 or above. Families with low socioeconomic status are, therefore, likely 
17
to be excluded from research that is carried out via digital media platforms. This 
data gap ought to be emphasised, since – as noted above – it potentially reinforces 
existing social inequalities.  
 
Analysing data from Mumsnet forums is valuable in ascertaining what the 
contributors to the forums are discussing. However, since Mumsnet is an open 
platform and it is not possible to break down the profiles of people who post on 
education-related posts, we were unable to effectively eliminate bias in the voices 
we picked up. One clear limitation is the Mumsnet readership which is 85% 
18
female. Mumsnet forum posts are, therefore, likely to represent female 
19
perspectives in particular.  Furthermore, the research team analysed those posts 
that were identified by Mumsnet as education-related (tagged with ‘e-learning’), 
which means that it is possible we missed potential targets. In a longer project, we 
might have been able to refine the set of hits and carry out clustering analyses, 
which in turn would have enabled better extraction of topics. 
15
 Teaching and Teacher Education  (2017), ‘​Subjectivity of Teacher Judgments: Exploring Student 
Characteristics That Influence Teacher Judgments of Student Ability​’ 
16
 ODI (2020), ​Monitoring Digital Inequality 
17
 University of Cambridge (2020), ​Opinion: Coronavirus has intensified the UK's digital divide 
18
 A voluntary annual census conducted by Mumsnet suggests a core demographic across the 
platform of 18-45 year-olds of which 88% are parents/carers. 85% are in social grade ABC1 (upper, 
middle and lower middle class), with 77% being homeowners. 79% of Mumsnet users are in paid work 
(Source: Mumsnet 2020). 
19
 ​Mediatel (2017), ​Mumsnet founder on anonymity, authenticity and influence  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   10 

 
 
 
Mumsnet’s privacy policy informs users that it is a public rather than private 
20
space, and that Mumsnet occasionally shares anonymised data for analysis 
purposes. The ethics arising from sourcing and analysing data from online forums 
for research purposes are, however, a subject of debate. There is currently no 
21
consensus on whether the informed consent of users who post on online forums 
should be sought if their contributions are to be used in research as long as they 
are anonymous.  
 
As discussed in the ODI Data Ethics Canvas that accompanies this report, we 
22
decided not to seek separate consent of Mumsnet users to use their content in 
our research, since we were not analysing individual contributions by forum users, 
but analysing key terms emerging from forum texts; and since users’ identities, 
accounts and individual posts were not revealed and therefore their anonymity is 
assured. However, we will be holding a discussion on Mumsnet with Mumsnet 
users about the use of their data in this research project, and how they feel about 
other similar uses. 
 
As outlined in the ODI Data Ethics Canvas that accompanies this report, it was 
difficult for us to mitigate these potential biases in the data available to us. This 
research should, therefore, be treated as a pilot project that, we hope, will 
encourage further research that provides different perspectives and fill the gaps in 
data outlined in this report. 
 
Sharing our research data 
The data collected for this project is publicly available via a dedicated, interactive 
webpage and tool, created by ODI Leeds: ​odi-analyses.odileeds.org​. The site 
allows anyone to explore the data for free, including results from the surveys, 
Barnardo’s site, and the analysis of Mumsnet forums.  
 
Barnardo's and the ODI are exploring options for sharing the anonymised data 
more widely, to support research within a robust ethical framework. In turn, 
Mumsnet data was accessed under a data-sharing agreement which allowed the 
ODI to search and analyse terms under the provision that we only retain data for 
the duration of the project. This means we are unable to publish the raw data we 
have analysed. All forum posts are publicly available via the Mumsnet website.  
 
As noted earlier, after completing the ODI Data Ethics Canvas, we decided not to 
release the qualitative interviews carried out by MyEd, as they contain personal 
and potentially sensitive information that risks identifying the interview 
participants, which include children and young people. 
 
 
  
20
 Mumsnet (2020), ​Privacy policy 
21
 Emotion, Space and Society (2018) . ‘​What Are You Feeling Right Now?’ Communities of Maternal 
Feeling on Mumsnet.​’ 
22
ODI (2020), ​Data on children in lockdown - Data Ethics Canvas 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   11 

 
 
Impact of lockdown on 
educational attainment 
Previous research  
Since March 2020, many pupils have experienced disruptions and a reduction in 
their education, and a marked slowdown in their educational progress. There is 
very little publicly available data on how pupils’ academic performance has been 
affected by emergency school closures during coronavirus. With exams cancelled 
this year, A-level and GCSE results were based on teacher assessments, and the 
DfE did not publish SATs results for 2020. Except for A-level and GCSE grades, 
23
little is known about how the lockdown has affected pupils’ academic progress, 
and how the current disruptions to education due to the pandemic are affecting 
children’s learning experiences.  
 
Research by the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) 
provides an indication of how emergency school closures during coronavirus 
affected academic learning. The study suggested that, on average, just under four 
in 10 (38%) pupils in the UK experienced full schooling during the first lockdown. 
24
Furthermore, a report by the National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER) 
showed that teachers felt that their pupils were, on average, three months behind 
in their curriculum learning as a result of the first public lockdown. In a survey of 
3,000 senior leaders and teachers at more than 2,000 schools in England, nearly 
all teachers (98%) reported that their pupils are behind where they would normally 
expect them to be in their curriculum learning at the end of the 2019/20 school 
year. These results are, however, based on teachers’ judgements of children’s 
25
progress and do not give a clear picture of exactly how behind children are with 
their curriculum learning.  
 
Existing research suggests that lockdown was experienced differently by pupils 
from different types of schools. For example, private schools were more likely to 
be able to provide online resources, live classes and one-to-one contact with 
pupils than state-funded schools. A Teacher Tapp survey commissioned by the 
26
Sutton Trust suggested that, at private schools, 51% of primary and 57% of 
secondary students in England accessed online lessons every day; more than 
twice as likely as their counterparts in state schools.  
27
 
Disruptions to education during the first lockdown also disproportionately affected 
children from disadvantaged economic backgrounds. Many economically 
disadvantaged children did not have the digital technology they needed to study 
effectively from home. An estimated 700,000 children in the UK currently do not 
23
 UK Government (2016), The DfE usually publishes results of A-Levels, GCSEs and SATs on a yearly 
basis, including data on pupil demographics. See: ​National curriculum assessments at key stage 2 in 
England, 2016 (provisional) 
24
 LSE (2020), The findings are based on a representative random sample of 10,010 individuals aged 16 
to 65 who were surveyed between 14 September and 12 October 2020. See: ​Generation COVID: 
Emerging work and education inequalities  
25
 NFER (2020). ​Schools responses to Covid-19: The challenges facing schools and pupils in 
September 2020​ (Accessed: 9 October 2020) 
26
 Sutton Trust, April 2020. ‘​COVID-19 and Social Mobility Impact Brief​’​ ​(Accessed: 5 October 2020) 
27
 Sutton Trust (April 2020), ‘​COVID-19 and Social Mobility Impact Brief​’  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   12 

 
 
have a desktop, laptop or tablet, and 60,000 children do not have internet 
connectivity at home. A study by the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG) 
28
indicated that families with low incomes were twice as likely to lack technical 
equipment to support homeschooling (laptops, computers, tablets) during 
lockdown as families with high incomes.  
29
 
A report by the Education Policy Institute suggests that the most disadvantaged 
children are also the most likely to currently miss the most learning as a result of 
the disruptions to schools. The analysis suggests that in areas with the highest 
30
rates of the virus in the UK, such as north-west England, as many as four in 10 
secondary pupils were unable to attend school during October​.​ Based on a 
snapshot survey by the DfE, the report shows that the overall attendance rate for 
31
secondary schools in England was 82% for secondary schools and 90% for 
primary schools. However, in some areas, attendance was less than 70%. In 
Knowsley, Merseyside – one of the areas worst affected by coronavirus – 61% of 
secondary pupils and 78% of primary school children attended school on 15 
October 2020.  
32
 
It is possible that the ongoing impacts of coronavirus will further increase existing 
disparities in children’s academic progress. Data from the DfE shows that prior to 
coronavirus, children from families of low socioeconomic status have worse 
academic performance than their wealthier peers. In 2019, of pupils who were 
eligible for free school meals (FSMs) in England, or who were in care or adopted 
from care, only 25% achieved grades 9–5 in GCSE English and Maths, 
33
compared with 50% of all other pupils.  
34
 
The NFER study, noted earlier, showed that 61% of teachers reported in May 
2020 that there was a learning gap between socioeconomically disadvantaged 
pupils and their peers that had widened during lockdown, with the remainder 
judging that this gap had either remained the same (32%) or had reduced (7%). 
35
NFER attributed the reduction in the learning gap reported by a minority of 
teachers to non-disadvantaged pupils having lost more learning than their 
disadvantaged peers, rather than disadvantaged pupils having progressed with 
their learning during lockdown. It has also been suggested that some children, 
such as those in care, coped well with the disruption of education because they 
did not have the pressure of going to school during lockdown.  
36
 
There is, however, a lack of timely data that might confirm whether differences in 
academic progress between disadvantaged pupils and others have indeed 
widened as a result of lockdown, and which pupils currently require extra support 
from teachers. While some research exists in this area, the source data is often 
not shared with school leaders or made open for other researchers or 
organisations to analyse.  
28
 The Children’s Commissioner for England (2020) ‘​Tackling the disadvantage gap during the Covid-19 
crisis​’ 
29
 CPAG (2020) ‘​The Cost of Learning in Lockdown: family experiences of school closures’.  
30
 Education Policy Institute (2020). ‘​School attendance rates across the UK since full reopening’  
31
 UK Parliament (2020), ‘​Written questions and answer: Schools: Coronavirus - question for 
Department for Education​’ 
32
  Education Policy Institute (2020), ​School attendance rates across the UK since full reopening’  
33
 GCSEs are graded 9 to 1, while A-levels are graded A* to G. Grade 9 is the highest grade, set above 
the old A*. 
34
 See: ​Key stage 4 performance, 2019 (revised)​ and: ​Opinion: Coronavirus has intensified the UK's 
digital divide 
35
 NFER (2020), ​Schools Responses to Covid-19 
36
 The Telegraph (2020), ​Children in care are 'thriving' during lockdown because they do not have the 
pressure of school, children's services boss says  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   13 

 
 
 
Teachers’ perspectives on children’s academic performance 
In collaboration with Teacher Tapp, we carried out a quantitative survey on 27 
October 2020 that asked 6,460 teachers in England what proportion of the pupils 
they teach are currently behind in their learning. This question aimed to investigate 
teachers’ assessments on where their students should be in their curriculum 
learning at that point in time, shortly after schools in England reopened to all 
students following the lockdown.  
 
The results showed that 69% of teachers who took part in the survey stated that 
one fifth of their class or more was behind. Five per cent of the teachers said that 
one pupil in their class (one in 30 pupils) was behind; 44% said that one third of 
their class or more was behind; 12% said that half of their class was behind; 8% 
stated that ‘almost all of their pupils were behind; and 10% said they did not know 
who was behind or could not answer the question.  
 
 
➔Teacher Tapp survey | Total respondents: 6,460 | Questions asked on 27 October 2020 
➔View full-size version 
 
The survey results are teachers’ current judgements of their pupils’ performance, 
rather than standardised assessment results. As noted earlier, teachers’ 
assessments can be subject to bias and should, therefore, be interpreted as 
subjective estimates about pupils’ current academic performance.  
37
 
Differences by pupil characteristics 
37
 Teaching and Teacher Education (2017), ‘​Subjectivity of Teacher Judgments: Exploring Student 
Characteristics That Influence Teacher Judgments of Student Ability​. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   14 

 
 
The survey revealed significant differences between the responses of teachers 
from state schools and teachers from private schools. Just over one quarter (26%) 
of teachers from state schools reported that one in five pupils are behind, 
compared with 16% of teachers from private schools. By comparison, one in 
three teachers from private schools (29%) stated that only one in 30 students (one 
in a class) are behind, compared with 2% of teachers from state schools.  
 
The largest difference in responses was between primary private school teachers 
and primary state school teachers. Of primary school teachers in private schools, 
more than two thirds (72%) reported that fewer than three pupils in their class are 
currently behind in their curriculum learning, compared with just 7% of primary 
school teachers in state schools.  
 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
Teachers in schools with a higher proportion of children eligible for free school 
meals (FSMs) were more likely to report that their pupils were behind in their 
38
curriculum learning. Nearly one in four (24%) teachers in schools with a small 
proportion of children eligible for FSMs said that three pupils per class were 
behind, compared with only 7% of teachers in schools with a large proportion of 
children eligible for FSMs.  
38
 Teacher Tapp’s weighting includes free school meals quartile: state schools are split into four 
groups, separately for primary and secondary. The three cut points for primary are: 5.3, 10.4, 19.2, and 
the 3 cut points for secondary are: 6.7, 11.4, 18.6. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   15 

 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
 
These results indicate that there is a gap in educational progress between pupils 
from private schools and pupils from state schools, and between schools with a 
large proportion of pupils eligible for FSMs and with a small proportion of pupils 
eligible for FSMs.  
 
To investigate these findings further, we asked Teacher Tapp to share the results 
of one of its earlier surveys on learning during lockdown. On 1 May 2020, Teacher 
Tapp asked 7,700 teachers across England if they felt their pupils were ‘having a 
successful learning experience at home’ (that is, learning as much or more than 
they would if they were at school). There were variations in the answers of 
teachers from state schools and those from private schools. While 42% of 
secondary teachers from private schools reported that all or almost all of their 
students had a very successful learning experience (at the time when the survey 
was carried out), only 3% of secondary school teachers from state schools said 
the same. In turn, 28% of primary school teachers from private schools said that 
all or almost all of their students had a very successful learning experience, 
compared with 3% of primary school teachers from state schools. There was no 
significant difference in responses to this question from teachers from different 
regions or from schools with different proportions of pupils eligible for FSMs. 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   16 

 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
 
While this data gives an indication of the impact of lockdown on children’s 
academic progress, it does not show how achievements might have changed at 
different points during lockdown. Since we do not have a reliable baseline from 
before the pandemic, the same survey question would need to be asked on a 
regular basis in order to document teachers’ perspectives on different pupils’ 
educational achievements over time.  
 
What is more, the survey did not consider other potentially important factors that 
may predict loss of learning for different pupils, including gender, ethnicity, 
whether they grew up in an economically disadvantaged family (the bottom 20% 
of family income distribution), pre-lockdown employment status of their parents, 
and changes in the labour market status of parents during lockdown. Collecting 
data that takes into account these variables will be crucial in future research; in 
identifying other reasons why certain children have different learning experiences 
during lockdown than others. 
 
Our sample of 29 qualitative interviews with teachers, parents/carers and pupils 
provided insights into factors that could be explored, although it must be kept in 
mind that the number of interviews is very small and did not include 
parents/carers from economically disadvantaged backgrounds.  
 
Learning experiences during lockdown: views from children, 
parents/carers and teachers 
In the interviews that were carried out for the project, parents/carers whose 
children attended a private school reported that the school provided a significant 
amount of learning resources during lockdown, including a structured timetable, 
live online classes, online learning materials and one-to-one support from 
teachers.  
 
Parents/carers of primary school children at state schools had mixed experiences 
of how their children’s schools provided learning materials and online classes. 
Some parents/carers said they received a good amount of learning resources and 
personal support from their child’s school, while others lamented having had 
insufficient contact with their children’s teachers, receiving insufficient learning 
materials, and lacking guidance on which online resources to use for 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   17 

 
 
homeschooling. The latter group said that they would have benefited from more 
guidance from schools on how to use online resources, how to structure learning 
for their children at home, and how to teach certain concepts. 
39
 
Pupils who we interviewed who attended a private school reported having a 
wealth of learning resources available to them, but some reported feeling stressed 
and overwhelmed by the large volume of work set for them. One young person 
reported spending over five hours on online classes every day. We will explore the 
impact of lockdown on pupils’ emotional wellbeing in the next section. 
 
Teachers explained to us that lack of access to electronic devices was an 
obstacle to effective homeschooling during the first national lockdown. Five out of 
the 10 teachers we spoke to talked about their pupils’ lack of access to digital 
technology and/or good broadband connection as a major obstacle to their ability 
to deliver remote teaching. Children who had to share electronic devices with 
parents and/or siblings also had less time to study compared with their peers from 
families where multiple electronic devices were available. 
 
However, not all pupils with good access to online learning resources and online 
classes reported being able to study effectively from home during lockdown. 
Some young people we interviewed said they lacked motivation to study from 
home during lockdown because they did not enjoy spending long periods of time 
learning on the screen. One secondary school pupil said:  
Other pupils said that online learning was difficult due to a lack of immediate, 
face-to-face communication with their teachers and peers. One pupil noted that 
they found it difficult to concentrate during online lessons held on platforms such 
as Zoom, Google Meet and Microsoft Teams, as it was noisy and unsuitable for 
having class discussions. Teachers, too, reported encountering difficulties when 
attempting to carry out group discussions during online lessons and when trying 
to provide one-to-one assistance to pupils online. They also said that it was 
difficult to monitor pupils’ attendance when they were studying remotely.  
 
There were also pupils, however, who said they enjoyed studying online because 
it allowed them to study at their own pace, they were able to structure their 
learning themselves, and they had fewer distractions than at school.  
 
Teachers suggested in the interviews that children who had a positive 
homeschooling experience during the first nationwide lockdown often had support 
from their parents/carers available to them. Teachers reported that children who 
did not have significant gaps in their learning had parents/carers who managed to 
make learning at home relevant and engaging, as opposed to children whose 
39
 This finding confirms the result of a report by the Child Poverty Action Group in which parents 
reported difficulties in finding appropriate resources to support their children’s learning at home.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   18 
“ 
Doing online lessons and work at home meant I 
was completely on the computer all the time; we 
were expected to sit and watch the screen all day 
which is not good for our health and gave me 
headaches​. 

 
 
parents/carers were not able to support their children’s homeschooling. One 
primary teacher said: 
 
Parents’ discussions during lockdown: insights from Mumsnet data 
 
At the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic, Mumsnet created a new forum, 
‘Lockdown learning’, in response to large numbers of users posting to different 
forums to seek advice about enforced homeschooling during lockdown. This 
40
forum is dedicated to discussions about homeschooling during coronavirus. 
 
Parents’ preoccupation with homeschooling is demonstrated by our high-level 
analysis of education-related terms on Mumsnet forums. The 10 most prevalent 
bigrams (a pair of consecutive written words) in April are presented in the chart 
below. This shows the number of occurrences of the word pairing in all the text 
analysed from the forum data we had access to. 
 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
40
 Conversation with Mumsnet, 12 October 2020. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   19 
“ 
Those [pupils] whose parents were supportive, 
who made learning relevant and fun and 
reinforced it [...] did some fantastic things and 
came back without major gaps. [...] Those that 
had virtually nothing in terms of support at home 
and nothing digitally – we had no idea of whether 
they’d done it well or were making paper 
aeroplanes of the work. They had definitely lost 
some key skills, reading in particular.  

 
 
The most frequent bigrams during April included: ‘every day’ (34), ‘working home’ 
(33), ‘home learning’ (31), ‘screen time’ (30), ‘key worker’ (29), ‘home schooling’ 
(24) and ‘online learning’ (21). These terms align with some of the concerns 
parents/carers expressed in the research interviews, who said they struggled with 
juggling homeschooling and working from home. These terms show that, as 
schools closed abruptly, many parents/carers wanted to discuss their experiences 
of homeschooling and online learning with other parents/carers. In September, 
‘sent home’, ‘face mask’, ‘risk assessment’ and ‘go back’ were among the most 
frequent bigrams, signaling parents’ discussions about their children’s return to 
school.  
 
The research team selected terms associated with homeschooling (eg ‘learning’, 
‘progress’, ‘academic’) and searched for these during the months of January, April 
and September 2020 across all Mumsnet forums, to identify the prevalence of 
these terms in each month. In the following assessment, it is the relative change 
between months in frequency of these terms that is significant, not the absolute 
frequencies. This analysis showed that ‘teach’ and ‘learning’ had a high frequency 
in April (0.16%, or one in 625, and 0.4%, or one in 250, of all words used in 
Mumsnet posts tagged ‘e-learning’, respectively) compared with January and 
September, where these words did not feature among the 10 most frequent terms. 
The term ‘progress’ had a higher frequency in September (0.06%) compared with 
April.  
 
These findings could suggest that Mumsnet users discussed their children’s 
learning from home during early lockdown in April, and that they discussed their 
children's academic progress as schools reopened in September. 
 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
Mumsnet’s forum data could offer researchers the opportunity to source data on 
parents’ perspectives on school closures due to coronavirus. However, the limits 
of our analysis of Mumsnet’s data ought to be acknowledged. During the limited 
time available for this project, only a high-level analysis of key terms and bigrams 
was possible. It is not possible to draw too many general conclusions from this 
dataset given the random nature of threads that users choose to start. There is 
also no guarantee that a thread, once started, will attract any interaction with other 
users, further reducing the robustness of conclusions drawn. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   20 

 
 
Furthermore, Mumsnet users are predominantly economically advantaged families 
and those with good internet connection at home. This means that the 
perspectives of families from disadvantaged backgrounds are likely to be absent 
from the discussions. Furthermore, as indicated earlier, 85% of Mumsnet users 
are female. Mumsnet forum posts are, therefore, likely to represent female rather 
41
than male perspectives. 
 
In future research, an in-depth analysis of the meta-narratives emerging from 
discussions on Mumsnet forums would provide valuable insights for researchers 
focusing on parents’ concerns and discussions in general, and during crisis 
situations like coronavirus. 
 
Parents’ perspectives from interviews 
The interviews carried out by MyEd with parents/carers provide further potential 
insights into the challenges parents/carers experienced during lockdown. The 
interviews highlighted a variety of reasons why some parents/carers encountered 
challenges in supporting their children with homeschooling. First, in the context of 
an abrupt, largely unprepared shift to home learning, many parents/carers 
continued to work and had limited time available to support their children with 
their learning, especially if they looked after multiple children at the same time. 
These parents reported that juggling work and homeschooling was a major 
challenge during the first lockdown. 
 
Furthermore, parents/carers’ ability to support their children with studying 
depended on parents/carers’ own education level. One teacher explained that 
pupils of parents/carers who lack formal education themselves were less able to 
teach certain subjects (eg maths) to their children during lockdown. The teacher 
noted that at their school, many parents were unable to read or write.  
 
Finally, some parents/carers with children with disabilities and/or special 
educational needs (SEN) who took part in the interviews said they struggled with 
supporting their children’s learning at home as they did not have the same tailored 
support and resources available as was normally provided by their child’s school.  
 
These interviews could provide important additions and details to data sourced via 
Mumsnet forums. However, there are limits to the information our interviews can 
provide. As noted in the ​Methods and methodology section​, the data collected 
through the interviews is limited as it is based on a small sample of 29 interviews. 
What is more, this data is, to an extent, biased, since pupils and parents/carers 
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds were under-represented. 
Collecting data on these families’ perspectives through qualitative interviews is 
both urgent and necessary for explaining which pupils have fallen behind with 
their learning during lockdowns. 
 
 
Teachers’ perspectives on children’s learning 
The ODI carried out a survey on 20 October in collaboration with Teacher Tapp, 
which suggests that teachers are finding it challenging to identify gaps in different 
children’s learning. The survey asked 6,692 teachers in England what they 
identified as the key challenges of their daily lives as teachers. Participants were 
able to tick all options that applied to them. The biggest challenges identified by 
teachers were: implementing hygiene and social distancing regimes (62% on 
average); identifying gaps in children’s learning and working out how to help those 
in need of extra support (61%); designing remote learning resources for isolating 
41
 Mediatel (2017), ​Mumsnet founder on anonymity, authenticity and influence 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   21 

 
 
pupils/future lockdown (56%); and having to re-teach knowledge/skills from 
before lockdown (48%).  
42
 
Similar challenges were also mentioned by teachers who took part in the 
interviews for this project. Some teachers reported finding it challenging to identify 
which pupils currently have gaps in their academic performance and in which 
subjects, and which ones do not. This is because they did not know which 
children had continued to study during lockdown and which ones had not. Other 
teachers said they struggled with helping children who were finding it difficult to 
concentrate on learning tasks, following long periods away from school earlier in 
the year.  
 
Furthermore, teachers told us that coronavirus-related hygiene routines, social 
distancing measures, and keeping class bubbles separate were taking up a 
significant amount of their teaching time. This suggests that teachers are currently 
being tasked with keeping schools ‘Covid secure’, and that this is taking up a 
significant amount of planning, maintenance, time and energy. 
 
This survey provided us with data on teachers’ daily lives and challenges at a 
single point in time (20 October 2020). It does not, however, map how these 
concerns change over time. Collecting this data regularly – through quantitative, 
qualitative, reflexive approaches and insights from teachers/pupils, and 
parents/carers – and sharing it or making it open to others, could be beneficial for 
teachers and school leaders. This data could help schools identify and enable the 
development of strategies that assist school leaders with responding to the 
challenges posed by the pandemic. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
42
 ODI Leeds (2020), ​Data about children’s lives during the pandemic: interactive visualisations of the 
survey results  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   22 

 
 
Impact of lockdown on 
socioeconomic 
circumstances and 
emotional wellbeing 
 
Impact on children’s socioeconomic 
provision/circumstances  
 
An emerging body of research suggests that school closures did not only have an 
impact on academic performance, but also affected the social and economic 
environment of children and families. Research by the Food Foundation suggests 
that the first nationwide lockdown had negative impacts on the food security of 
children from different demographic groups, as many children no longer received 
free school meals (FSMs). This study was published as part of the joint 
#EndChildFoodPoverty campaign with Manchester United footballer Marcus 
Rashford. Based on a survey of 1,000 children, conducted by Childwise in 
43
September 2020, the Food Foundation showed that 29% of children aged 8-17 
44
were registered for FSMs, and that 42% of these children were newly registered to 
the scheme. The Food Foundation estimates that an additional 900,000 children 
have become eligible for FSMs this year.  
45
 
The survey by the Food Foundation/Childwise also showed that 64% of the 
children newly claiming FSMs are from households where the main earners were 
in higher income occupations. Moreover, a report by the Food Foundation 
published in August showed that 32% of households with children had 
experienced a drop in income since late March 2020. This suggests that the 
46
redundancies, furlough and loss of income during coronavirus are affecting 
parents/caregivers from a wide variety of different socio-economic backgrounds. 
 
Allen et al. suggest that, during the first nationwide lockdown, teachers carried out 
a wide variety of pastoral tasks to continue monitoring and supporting pupils from 
economically disadvantaged backgrounds. According to this study, teachers 
prioritised responding to the effects of poverty and food insecurity, including 
running food banks and delivering food parcels to disadvantaged pupils. Some 
teachers reported that they gave greater priority to these tasks than maintaining 
academic performance. 
47
43
 Earlier this year, the Food Foundation’s research catalysed a joint campaign with Rashford which 
resulted in a​ government U-turn​ on the provision of food vouchers during the summer holidays. This 
campaign reversed initial plans to drop the scheme. 
44
 Childwise’s online survey, conducted between 8-10 September, obtained data on 1,064 children 
aged 7-17 years from different regions of the UK. 
45
 ​Food Foundation (2020), ​Demand for free school meals rises sharply as the economic impact of 
Covid-19 on families bites 
46
 ​ibid. 
47
 Teacher Tapp, UCL Social Research Institute, UCL CEPEO (2020), ​How did the early stages of the 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   23 

 
 
 
However, there is very little open data on children’s food security, and it is 
therefore not possible to analyse the raw data from existing studies any further. In 
addition, statistics on food insecurity do not provide detailed information on how 
different groups of children and families responded to these challenges during 
lockdown, and what may have helped them cope with it. 
 
Teachers’ support for children during lockdown 
The interviews carried out by MyEd as part of this study suggested that teachers 
played an important role in helping pupils and families cope with some of the 
socio-economic impacts of school closures. Some teachers we spoke to told us 
they focused on monitoring children who were socially and economically 
vulnerable during the first nationwide lockdown, and that the academic 
performance of these children during this time was not their major concern. One 
teacher reported that their school made calls to every family to check on the 
welfare and protection of economically disadvantaged pupils. Another teacher 
explained that staff at her school participated in running a local food bank every 
day during lockdown and once a week in the summer holidays. One primary 
school teacher said: 
It is useful to contextualise these personal accounts with real-time, open data 
published by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). This data shows that 
the number of couples with child dependant(s) claiming Universal Credit rose from 
194,943 in May 2019 to 590,462 in May 2020, and the number of single parents 
with child dependant(s) nearly doubled from 552,912 in May 2019 to 1,035,165 in 
May 2020. Furthermore, since March 2020, there has been a surge in 
48
applications for Universal Credit in the UK. The number of people on Universal 
Credit in the UK on 11 July 2019 was 2.3 million. By 10 September 2020, this 
49
number had more than doubled to 5.7 million people, with the highest numbers of 
people claiming Universal Credit located in London and Essex, North and East 
Midlands, and North East England. This data could suggest that many children 
50
and families’ socio-economic status has been negatively affected since the initial 
lockdown in late March.  
 
Furthermore, the findings from our Teacher Tapp survey on 20 October 2020 
showed that teachers in England are currently providing additional support to 
pupils from economically disadvantaged backgrounds and to those who are 
COVID-19 pandemic affect teacher wellbeing?  
48
 Department for Work and Pensions (2020), ‘​Log into Stat-Xplore​’ 
49
 Department for Work and Pensions (2019). ‘​Universal Credit Statistics 29 April 2013 to 11 July 2019​’ 
50
 Department for Work and Pensions (2020). ‘​Universal Credit: Official Statistics​’  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   24 
“ 
We made calls to every family, not just for 
accessing but for safeguarding. We needed to 
know our kids were safe. We have some highly 
vulnerable kids, so our priority was to check their 
welfare and protection. [...] We wanted them to 
know that: “My teacher is still there, and my 
teacher still cares”. 

 
 
struggling with their mental health now that schools have reopened. The survey 
showed that one third (32%) of teachers identified the need to support pupils who 
are socially and economically disadvantaged as a key challenge. This response 
was the same across all regions of England.  
 
Detailed quantitative and representative information on how teachers are currently 
supporting pupils who continue to face economic hardship as a result of 
coronavirus is, however, not included in the data collected via the Teacher Tapp 
survey. This gap in data needs to be filled so that schools and policymakers can 
identify ways to support these children in the event of future disruptions to 
education. 
 
Impact of lockdown on children’s mental health 
and wellbeing 
During lockdown, children living in unsafe or challenging family environments, 
and/or children exposed to poverty and domestic violence, may have lost a safe 
space to learn, previously provided by schools – unless officially assessed as 
‘vulnerable’ and therefore able to continue to attend school. Existing research 
suggests that the school closures during the coronavirus pandemic have had a 
variety of adverse impacts on children’s mental health and emotional wellbeing. 
The children’s charity Barnardo’s carried out a survey in May 2020 with over 100 
school staff at primary, secondary and special needs schools. Of the participants, 
88% reported that the coronavirus pandemic was likely to have had an impact on 
the mental health and wellbeing of their pupils. In the survey, more than one 
51
quarter (26%) of teachers reported that they did not have sufficient information on 
the kind of tools and resources that can help them support children’s mental 
health and wellbeing, as well as access to social and emotional learning 
programmes. Young Minds (2020) carried out a survey of over 2,000 young 
52
people which showed that 83% of those who had pre-existing mental health 
needs felt that their mental health issues had worsened during the first lockdown.
 It also showed that the absence of daily routines provided by the school day, 
53
not being able to see friends and teachers at school, and more engagement with 
social media, exacerbated existing mental health problems.  
 
However, we need more data that provides information on how the effects of 
lockdown continue to affect the mental health of different groups of children, and 
what schools, government and third sector organisations can do to support them. 
Building a better data infrastructure in this area could start with relevant 
organisations sharing data they hold in a way that protects children’s privacy and, 
at the same time, is beneficial for other stakeholders. We explored what this might 
look like with Barnardo’s. 
 
 
Data from the Barnardo’s See, Hear, Respond​ ​Partnership 
The See, Hear, Respond Partnership, led by Barnardo’s and funded by the DfE, 
54
is a new service developed to provide a safety net for vulnerable children and 
young people during lockdown. The partnership involves collaborating with 
schools and charities to identify those children who are hidden from view; that is, 
those who are not receiving support from statutory organisations and those who 
51
 Barnardo's (2020), ‘​Time for a Clean Slate: Children’s Mental Health at the Heart of Education​’ 
52
 Barnardo's (2020), ‘​Time for a Clean Slate: Children’s Mental Health at the Heart of Education​’ 
53
 Young Minds (2020) ‘​Coronavirus Report: Impact on Young People with Mental Health Needs​’ 
54
 Barnardo’s (2020), ​See, Hear, Respond 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   25 

 
 
are at risk and/or experiencing adverse impacts to their health and emotional 
wellbeing. The initiative seeks to connect children and young people, in 
55
particular those who are vulnerable and isolated, with services such as online 
counselling or face-to-face therapy, and to support children with reintegrating at 
school.  
 
See, Hear, Respond works with more than 80 different voluntary sector 
organisations, made up of local and national charities, including 30 black, Asian, 
minority ethnic and refugee (BAMER) specific organisations. All delivery partners 
record requests for referrals of children via a shared case management system, 
which was developed specifically for the See, Hear, Respond Partnership. 
Partners are jointly collating data to create one single dataset that provides 
anonymous information about children who are being referred onto the 
programme, the support provided, and outcomes of the referral. This joint 
approach to data collection recognises the importance of collating and sharing 
data among organisations supporting young people and children whose mental 
health and wellbeing is affected by the pandemic.  
By late October, the See, Hear, Respond Partnership was delivering support to 
more than 20,000 children and young people. Barnardo’s shared more than 6,000 
records from this dataset with the ODI, which covered the period 17 June (when 
the partnership was launched) to 12 October 2020. Information in each record 
includes location (at local authority level), week of referral, reason(s) for referral 
(one or more, as assessed by worker triage), priority group(s) (as assessed by 
worker triage) and referral channel. In addition, a series of operational details are 
provided, which we have not analysed in the study (status, outcome). As noted 
earlier, referrals – but not people – are assigned an ID, which means it is not 
possible to identify a child who is referred to the service multiple times. The ID is 
not revealed in our analysis. 
Barnardo’s decided to share this data with the ODI so that it could be analysed for 
trends and to explore how it could be made open in a way that is beneficial to 
other organisations working with children, while also protecting children’s 
personal data. 
Increasing demand for support 
From the period 17 June to 12 October 2020, 6,468 referrals of children were 
recorded on the See, Hear, Respond Partnership secure case management 
system. These requests were individual referrals (either self-referred, 
parent-referred or professional-referred). This data does not include children 
Barnardo’s reached in detached street work, including groups of youth workers in 
public spaces and places who provide emotional and practical support to 
children. According to Barnardo’s, the latter group accounted for a further 12,451 
referrals.  
The number of referrals to Barnardo’s steadily increased between June and 
October 2020, reaching 1,000 in the week commencing 12 October 2020. The 
absence of a plateau in the graph below suggests that there is ongoing demand 
for the support services for children’s health and wellbeing.  
 
55
 Barnardo’s (2020) ​New Barnardos service launched -See Hear Respond 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   26 

 
 
  
➔View full-size version 
 
As the above graph shows, referrals increased significantly from September 2020 
onwards. Barnardo’s explained there are several possible explanations for this 
increase, including ​schools reopening and referring children who needed help and 
those who were still missing from school; partners being on-boarded and reaching 
into local communities; and increasing ​public awareness of the See, Hear, 
Respond Partnership. For example, between mid-July and late August 2020, 
Barnardo's secured more than 190 pieces of media coverage in professional and 
public press; they promoted See, Hear, Respond on social media; and information 
about the partnership was published on GOV.UK coronavirus-related web pages 
56
and coronavirus support sites for professional organisations. There were no 
significant differences in the numbers of referrals received across different regions 
of the UK. 
 
In general, the number of referrals has increased over time. However, there were 
two notable drops in referrals from all sources: one drop from 139 referrals per 
week to 46 referrals per week in mid-July; and one drop from around 300 referrals 
per week to 200 referrals per week at the end of August. These drops coincide 
with the beginning and the end of the school holidays.  
 
56
 UK government (2020), ​What parents and carers need to know about early years providers, schools 
and colleges in the autumn term 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   27 

 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
 
 
The role of schools in referrals 
 
In the See, Hear, Respond dataset, those who carried out the referrals were 
grouped into: guardians, professionals, delivery partners and children themselves. 
As the graph below shows, professionals (eg teachers, healthcare workers, 
nursery workers and education professionals) were the main source of referrals 
until early August, after which delivery partners were the major source of referrals. 
Referrals from children themselves and guardians were low, never exceeding 100 
per week.  
 
In July, the number of referrals by professionals dropped significantly, from 125 
referrals during the week commencing 13 July 2020, to 37 referrals during the 
week commencing 20 July 2020. This period coincided with the start of the 
summer holidays. The number of referrals rose again to 78 during the following 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   28 

 
 
week. At the end of August, the number of referrals dropped once again slightly, 
from 85 referrals recorded during the week commencing 24 August 2020 to 53 
referrals during the week commencing 31 August 2020. From early September 
onwards – coinciding with the end of the summer holidays – the number of 
referrals from professionals steadily increased week-by-week, rising from 53 
referrals during the week commencing 31 August 2020 to nearly 300 referrals by 
12 October 2020. 
 
 
 
➔View full-size version 
 
This pattern of referrals by professionals provides an indication of the important 
role schools play in referring vulnerable children and young people to support 
services. When schools reopened in England in early September 2020, the 
number of vulnerable children and young people referred steadily increased. This 
suggests that schools play a key role in monitoring the emotional wellbeing of 
children.  
 
Mental health, isolation and loneliness  
The five major reasons for the referral of children during June and October 2020 
were concerns about: a child’s mental health; isolation and loneliness; barriers to 
reintegration to education; parenting support; and parents’ mental health. The 
relative proportions of referrals for these reasons remained roughly constant 
during this period.  
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   29 

 
 
 
➔*There may be multiple reasons for referral 
➔View full-size version 
 
Priority groups 
Data from See, Hear, Respond provides information on the groups of children who 
were prioritised by the programme, namely: BAMER children who experience 
barriers to accessing services; children with SEN; children under five years old; 
children at risk of criminal and sexual exploitation outside of the home; young 
carers; and other children with emotional wellbeing needs. Referrals can be 
associated with multiple groups. 
 
Our data analysis showed which groups of children were referred via See, Hear, 
Respond. From 17 June to 12 October 2020, more than 3,500 of the 6468 
referrals were related to emotional wellbeing; nearly 2,500 were related to BAMER 
children; and just over 1,500 referrals were related to children with SEN.  
 
 
➔Each child may be in multiple priority groups 
➔View full-size version 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   30 

 
 
 
➔Referrals can be associated with multiple groups 
➔View full-size version 
 
This data provides valuable information on different groups of children who have 
been referred to services to support their mental health and wellbeing, and 
demonstrates the demand for support services like this. Analysis of this data also 
shows the crucial role of schools in monitoring and supporting children at risk of 
mental health problems. This data can provide valuable information for other third 
sector organisations in prioritising their work with vulnerable children.  
 
Certain limits to these findings need to be acknowledged. Since the See, Hear, 
Respond Partnership only started in June 2020, as an initiative that assists 
children whose mental health was affected by lockdown, it has not been possible 
to compare the results on children’s mental health to historical data from 
Barnardo’s, collected prior to the outbreak of coronavirus. Increases in numbers 
of referrals and changes in their composition could be artefacts of the growth in 
awareness and use of the service, rather than indications of underlying need. This 
data will become more robust over time. 
 
 
Data on parents/carers’ mental health: indications from Mumsnet 
forums 
The findings of this project suggest that, as a result of coronavirus, some 
parents/carers are stretched further than ever. Many families have been hit hard 
financially, and have new homeschooling and caring responsibilities, all of which 
can put additional strain on parents/carers’ mental health. In our interviews, 
parents/carers said they felt ‘overwhelmed’ by having to juggle homeschooling, 
existing work commitments and household chores. 
 
An indication of how parents felt during the lockdown is also provided by our 
analysis of Mumsnet forum terms. During September 2020, ‘mental health’ was 
among the 10 most frequent bigrams across all forums, which could be an 
indication of parents/carers discussing concerns about their own, or their 
children’s, mental health as a result of the pandemic – but could also simply arise 
from other issues parents/carers are currently dealing with.  
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   31 

 
 
 
➔Analysis of Mumsnet forum terms: January, April and September 2020 
➔View full-size version 
 
Our analysis of terms related to mental health indicates the frequency that 
Mumsnet users discussed their mental health and wellbeing on the site. During 
April 2020 – shortly after lockdown was introduced – the term ‘stress’ featured in 
around five times more frequently (0.05% of words used) in Mumsnet posts 
compared with January and September 2020 (around 0.01% of words used). The 
term ‘wellbeing’ featured in 0.02% of words used in Mumsnet posts during April, 
and this was around the same as in January (0.02%). Furthermore, the frequency 
of the term ‘mental’ increased​ ​between January and April and between April and 
September. Once again, this could suggest that parents/carers’ discussions on 
Mumsnet forums focused on the impacts of lockdown on the mental health and 
wellbeing of themselves and/or their children.  
 
There appeared to be no occurrences of the term ‘wellbeing’ in September, but it 
is possible that different spellings (eg ‘well-being’, ‘well being’) or variations 
thereof were used. This highlights the challenge we encountered in our analysis of 
this data, as noted earlier. In addition, there is no guarantee that people decide to 
start a thread in the first place – particularly about sensitive topics, including 
mental health, given the public nature of the forum. 
 
As noted above, a deeper understanding of how these terms were used by 
Mumsnet users, and the discussions on mental health that occurred on the site, is 
needed to enable wider conclusions to be drawn on how forum users’ described 
the impacts of lockdown on their mental health and wellbeing. The gaps in data 
could be filled, for example, through interviews and focus groups with Mumsnet 
users.  
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   32 

 
 
 
➔Mumsnet frequency of terms related to ‘mental health’ 
➔View full-size version 
 
This analysis of Mumsnet forums demonstrates the benefits of data collection and 
sharing during the current crisis. Mumsnet forums can provide timely data on 
some of the challenges currently experienced by parents/carers, while in-depth, 
real-time analyses of it could support actors in different sectors involved in 
providing support for parents/carers during the pandemic.  
Teachers’ mental health and wellbeing 
The sudden closure of schools in March 2020 impacted the professional lives of 
teachers, who had to adapt quickly to unfamiliar working patterns and new 
routines. This had a significant impact on some teachers’ emotional wellbeing. 
Previous research carried out by University College London, via Teacher Tapp, 
found that school closures earlier this year negatively impacted the mental health 
of teachers. Teacher Tapp surveys indicate that shortly before schools closed to 
57
the majority of students in March, teachers’ anxiety levels peaked and they 
reported high staff absence rates, emergency closures and uncertainty about 
when school would reopen. During the first nationwide lockdown, work-related 
58
anxiety fell slightly for state school teachers, some of whom reported having more 
energy and time for their own families.  
59
 
The study also found that work-related anxiety rose specifically for headteachers 
during lockdown, when they were required to manage a number of challenging 
administrative tasks. Towards the end of June, one in five headteachers felt that 
the experience has made it more likely that they will seek to leave the profession.  
60
 
This project builds on this research by collecting data on teachers’ mental health 
during the current period of uncertainty. We carried out a survey with 6,599 
teachers in England via Teacher Tapp on 20 October, in which they were asked 
how they would describe their current mental health and wellbeing. Teachers’ 
responses were similar across all sectors and geographic areas. The majority of 
teachers said they were either ‘mostly happy and confident in respect of my work’ 
(32%) or ‘slightly anxious and stressed because of my work’ (31%). The exception 
to this were primary school teachers, of which 44% stated they were ‘mostly 
happy and confident in respect of my work’.  
57
 Teacher Tapp, UCL Social Research Institute, UCL CEPEO (2020), ​‘How Did the Early Stages of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic Affect Teacher Wellbeing?’  
58
 ​Teacher Tapp (2020), ​Lessons you look forward to (and the ones you dread) and an update on 
wellbeing 
59
 Teacher Tapp, UCL Social Research Institute, UCL CEPEO (2020), ​‘How Did the Early Stages of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic Affect Teacher Wellbeing?’  
60
 Allen, Rebecca, John Jerrim, and Sam Sims (2020). “How Did the Early Stages of the COVID-19 
Pandemic Affect Teacher Wellbeing?”  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
➔Teachers and headteachers response to question: Which of the following most closely 
describes your current mental health and wellbeing? 
➔View full-size version 
 
The survey results indicate that headteachers continue to be affected by 
work-related anxiety and stress. One in four headteachers (27%) – compared to 
one in five in June 2020 – reported feeling either ‘completely overwhelmed by my 
work challenges’ (11%), or feeling ‘very anxious and stressed because of my 
work’ (16%). This extended period of stress and anxiety may have long-term 
consequences for the retention of headteachers in the future. Data collection on 
the unique needs of headteachers and how to support them within the current 
crisis is both urgent and necessary. 
 
Interviews with teachers by MyEd gave some insights into the various challenges 
experienced by teachers on a daily basis during and after lockdown. Teachers told 
us that, when schools closed abruptly in March, guidelines and information from 
the government was minimal and that staff were worried about their pupils, 
especially about their mental health and wellbeing. Some teachers also said it was 
difficult for them to switch from teaching in the classroom to online teaching, as 
they did not have the digital skills necessary to prepare online classes and/or 
online learning resources.  
 
Since schools in England reopened to all pupils in September, teachers continue 
to juggle a variety of complex tasks. Teachers who took part in the MyEd 
interviews told us that they are finding it difficult to implement time-consuming 
coronavirus-related hygiene routines and social distancing measures alongside 
identifying pupils who are behind with their learning, and responding to 
disruptions to learning incurred by pupils and/or staff who fall ill with coronavirus. 
Since teachers are having to juggle a variety of different tasks, it is possible that 
less time for teaching remains, which, in turn, could lead to more gaps in 
educational attainment and/or more stress for teachers. One primary school 
teacher summarised these challenges as follows: 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   34 

 
 
This survey provided data on teachers’ emotional wellbeing during the current 
situation, building on earlier surveys on teachers’ mental health during lockdown 
carried out by Teacher Tapp. Collecting more of this data and combining it with 
qualitative interviews with teachers, and sharing it or making it open to 
policymakers, could be beneficial in supporting teachers and school leaders with 
the challenges they are facing during the current crisis. This data infrastructure 
could assist policymakers with developing coping strategies to support teachers 
with their work, and could also address the risk of more and more headteachers 
leaving the profession.  
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   35 
“ 
The challenges now, from talking to colleagues, 
will be the disparities between the children that 
were supported and carried on learning and those
that didn’t. And the difficulties in concentration, as 
you get them back into a learning mindset. And 
then you’ll have social difficulties in that they can’t 
mix with children they would have wanted to 
because of bubbling. A lot of teachers are feeling 
that the days are very intense. If they’re intense 
for teachers, imagine how the kids feel. 

 
 
Conclusions and 
recommendations  
Conclusion 
Periods of emergency school closure and disruption to schooling due to the 
coronavirus pandemic have different effects on the learning experiences and 
mental health and wellbeing of different groups of pupils. This pilot project 
provides a rapid data response to the current crisis. This response was made 
possible by sourcing timely datasets from a range of sources (government, third 
sector, private sector and academic sector) and using different approaches 
(qualitative and quantitative) to support a wide range of actors in different sectors 
involved in providing support for children, families and teachers. Working closely 
with Barnardo’s and Mumsnet, this project has surfaced some of the insights that 
are possible when data from civil society organisations and social media platforms 
is made available.  
 
Our findings highlight the need to address educational attainment gaps. However, 
the data we have used and interviews we carried out may itself exclude or fail to 
highlight the specific challenges faced by children and families from 
socio-economic disadvantaged backgrounds and other groups (eg young carers 
and children with SEN). Educational challenges may, therefore, not simply be 
related to one’s ability to access learning resources and digital technology, but 
also depend on one’s ability to be represented within research and data 
collection. 
 
We hope that our research will inspire the collection and safe sharing of more 
qualitative and quantitative data from a variety of sources, for all regions/nations in 
the UK, and across variables (age, SEN, gender, ethnicity). This data needs to be 
collected and shared in real time, so that resources can be mobilised promptly to 
respond quickly to emerging issues.  
 
These challenges and findings have informed our recommendations outlined 
below. 
Recommendations 
Schools, headteachers, children’s services and policymakers currently face 
unprecedented challenges. Some of these could be helped to be addressed 
through better access to data. We urgently need a data infrastructure that is as 
open as possible, while protecting people’s privacy, to provide the timely 
information that teachers, headteachers and policymakers need to support 
different groups of children during the current, constantly evolving, crisis.  
 
The creation of an efficient data infrastructure in this area needs to take into 
consideration:  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   36 

 
 
●There is a need to collect timely data on a repeated and ongoing basis 
that documents the changing needs of different groups of children, 
families and teachers within the current period of uncertainty.  
 
●This data needs to include the needs of children and families with 
disadvantaged socio-economic status, and of those without access, or 
limited access, to digital technologies. Collecting this data can provide a 
clearer picture of the needs of the most vulnerable groups in society and 
may require non-digital approaches.  
 
●Data needs to be shared and opened up in a safe way, to enable a variety 
of analyses that can inform organisations, policymakers and schools in 
their work with children, families and teachers. This includes data that is 
stewarded by civil society organisations and social media platforms, as 
well as those in the education sector.  
 
This project has highlighted the need to build a better data infrastructure within 
the education sector, and has demonstrated how real-time, open, shared data can 
inform the response of schools and other organisations to the various challenges 
posed by the coronavirus crisis. It demonstrates the benefits of enabling more 
data to be shared and made open in a safe and ethical way, to ultimately inform 
decision-making processes that benefit society as a whole. 
 
If you have data that you think could be used to shed light on the impact of 
coronavirus on education and children’s wellbeing, and need help in making it 
available for others to understand and reuse, please get in touch with us at 
info@theodi.org​. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   37 

 
 
Bibliography 
 
➔Allen, R. et al. (2020) ‘How did the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic affect 
teacher wellbeing?’ Teacher Tapp, UCL Social Research Institute, UCL CEPEO, p. 
15. Available at: 
https://johnjerrim.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/allen_jerrim_covid_final.pdf​. 
➔Andrew, A. et al. (2020) ‘Learning during the lockdown: real-time data on 
children’s experiences during home learning’. Institute for Fiscal Studies. doi: 
10.1920/BN.IFS.2020.BN0288 
➔Barnardo's (2020) ‘Time for a Clean Slate: Children’s Mental Health at the Heart of 
Education’. Barnardo's. Available at: 
https://www.barnardos.org.uk/time-clean-slate-mental-health-heart-education-rep
ort​ (Accessed: 21 September 2020) 
➔Beng, H. S. and Wardle, L. (2020) ‘Teachers’ wellbeing and workload during 
Covid-19 lockdown’. Durham University and School Zone. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342439172_Teachers'_wellbeing_and_
workload_during_Covid-19_lockdown​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020) 
➔Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG) (2020) ‘The Cost of Learning in Lockdown: 
family experiences of school closures’. CPAG. Available at: 
https://cpag.org.uk/policy-and-campaigns/report/cost-learning-lockdown-family-e
xperiences-school-closures​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020) 
➔Children’s Commissioner (2020) ‘Tackling the disadvantage gap during the 
Covid-19 crisis’. Available at: 
https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/report/tackling-the-disadvantage-gap-
during-the-covid-19-crisis/​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020). 
➔Faculty of Health, Social Care and Medicine, ‘Children’s Information about 
coronavirus (COVID-19)’ (2020) Faculty of Health, Social Care and Medicine, 
Edgehill University. Available at: 
https://www.edgehill.ac.uk/health/research/children-and-covid19/​ (Accessed: 21 
September 2020) 
➔Clayton, C., Clayton, R. and Potter, M. (2020) ‘British Families in Lockdown’. 
Leeds Trinity University and UKRI England. Available at: 
https://www.leedstrinity.ac.uk/research/british-families-in-lockdown-study/ 
(Accessed: 21 September 2020) 
➔Cullinane, Carl and Montacute, R. (2020) ‘COVID-19 and Social Mobility Impact 
Brief. Sutton Trust’. Available at: 
https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/covid-19-and-social-mobility-impact-br
ief/​ (Accessed: 23 September 2020) 
➔Department for Education (2019). ‘Schools, pupils, and their Characteristics’: 
January 2019. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/schools-pupils-and-their-characteristic
s-january-2019​ (Accessed 17 October 2020). 
➔Department for Work and Pensions (2020). ‘Universal Credit: Official Statistics’. 
Available at: 
https://dwp-stats.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=f90fb305d
8da4eb3970812b3199cf489​ (Accessed 18 October 2020).  
➔Department for Work and Pensions (2019). Universal Credit Statistics 29 April 
2013 to 11 July 2019. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/universal-credit-29-april-2013-to-11
-july-2019/universal-credit-statistics-29-april-2013-to-11-july-2019  
➔Eivers, E., Worth, J. and Gosh, A. (2020) ‘Home learning during Covid-19: Findings 
from the Understanding Society Longitudinal Study’. National Foundation for 
Educational Research (NFER). Available at: 
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/home-learning-during-covid-19-findings-from-the-underst
anding-society-longitudinal-study/​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020). 
➔Elliot, Lee, Major Andrew Eyles and Stephen Machin (2020). ‘Generation COVID: 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   38 

 
 
Emerging work and education inequalities’. A CEP Covid Analysis. LSE and UKRI. 
Paper no. 011. Available at: 
http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/cepcovid-19-011.pdf​ (Accessed 2 November 
2020)  
➔Evans, C. et al. (2020) ‘Teaching under Lockdown: the experiences of London 
English teachers’, Changing English, 27(3), pp. 244–254. doi: 
10.1080/1358684X.2020.1779030​. 
➔Food Foundation (2020). ‘New Food Foundation Survey: Five Million People Living 
in Households with Children have experienced food insecurity since Lockdown 
started’, May 2020. ​Available at: 
https://foodfoundation.org.uk/new-food-foundation-survey-five-million-people-livi
ng-in-households-with-children-have-experienced-food-insecurity-since-lockdow
n-started​ (Accessed 10 October 2020) 
➔Girlguiding (2020) ‘Early findings on the impact of Covid-19 on girls and young 
women’. Available at: 
https://www.girlguiding.org.uk/globalassets/docs-and-resources/research-and-ca
mpaigns/girlguiding-covid19-research-briefing.pdf​ (Accessed: 28 September 
2020) 
➔Montacute, R. (2020) Social Mobility and COVID-19. Sutton Trust. Available at: 
https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/social-mobility-and-covid-19/ 
(Accessed: 28 September 2020) 
➔Meissel, Kane, Frauke Meyer, Esther S. Yao, and Christine M. Rubie-Davies. 
‘Subjectivity of Teacher Judgments: Exploring Student Characteristics That 
Influence Teacher Judgments of Student Ability.’ Teaching and Teacher Education 
65 (July 1, 2017): 48–60.​ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2017.02.021 
➔Moss, G. et al. (2020) Primary teachers’ experience of the COVID-19 lockdown: 
‘Eight key messages for policymakers going forward’. Institute of Education, UCL. 
Available at: 
https://www.ucl.ac.uk/ioe/departments-and-centres/centres/international-literacy-
centre/duty-care-and-duty-teach-educational-priorities-response-covid-19-crisis/r
eports​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020) 
➔Murray, C. et al. (2020) ‘Reconceptualising relatedness in education in “Distanced” 
Times’, European Journal of Teacher Education, 0(0), pp. 1–15. doi: 
10.1080/02619768.2020.1806820 
➔National Youth Trends (2020) Take the Temperature. Available at: 
https://www.beatfreeksyouthtrends.com/take-the-temperature​ (Accessed: 28 
September 2020) 
➔Office for National Statistics (2020a) ‘Coronavirus and homeschooling in Great 
Britain: April to June 2020’. Available at: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/coronavirusandhomeschoolingingreatbritainaprilt
ojune2020​ (Accessed: 28 September 2020) 
➔Office for National Statistics (2020b). ‘Coronavirus and the social impacts on Great 
Britain: 16 October 2020’. Available at: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/coronavirusandthesocialimpactsongreatbritain16
october2020​ (Accessed 17 October 2020) 
➔Pedersen, S., and D. Lupton (2018). ‘What Are You Feeling Right Now?’ 
Communities of Maternal Feeling on Mumsnet.’ Emotion, Space and Society 26, 
pp. 57–63.​ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emospa.2016.05.001 
➔Power, K. (2020) ‘The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the care burden of 
women and families’, Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy, 16(1), pp. 
67–73. doi:​ 10.1080/15487733.2020.1776561 
➔Sharp, C. et al. (2020) ‘Schools’ responses to Covid-19: The challenges facing 
schools and pupils in September 2020’. National Foundation for Educational 
Research (NFER), p. 72. Available at: 
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/media/4119/schools_responses_to_covid_19_the_challeng
es_facing_schools_and_pupils_in_september_2020.pdf​ (Accessed: 2 October 
2020) 
➔Sibieta, Luke (2020). School attendance rates across the UK since full reopening. 
Education Policy Institute, October 2020. Available at: 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   39 

 
 
https://epi.org.uk/publications-and-research/school-attendance-since-full-reopeni
ng/​ (Accessed 31 October 2020) 
➔The Trussell Trust. ‘Summary Findings on the Impact of the Covid-19 Crisis on 
Food Banks,’ June 2020.​ Available at: 
https://www.trusselltrust.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/06/APRIL-Data-bri
efing_external.pdf​. (Accessed 17 October 2020) 
➔UNESCO Centre, School of Education, Ulster University (2020) Northern Ireland 
‘Parent Surveys: Experiences of Supporting Children’s Home Learning During 
Covid-19’. Available at: 
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/597969/UU-School-survey-
Report-web.pdf​ (Accessed: 21 September 2020) 
➔Walsh, G. et al (2020) ‘Home-schooling in Northern Ireland during the COVID-19 
crisis: the experiences of parents and carers’. Stranmillis University College. 
Available at: 
https://www.stran.ac.uk/research-paper/creu-home-schooling-during-covid/ 
(Accessed: 21 September 2020) 
➔Young Minds (2020) ‘Coronavirus Report: Impact on Young People with Mental 
Health Needs’. Available at: 
https://youngminds.org.uk/resources/reports/our-impact-reports/​ (Accessed: 28 
September 2020) 
➔Youth Sports Trust (2020). ‘Evidence Paper: The Impact of Covid-19 Restrictions 
on Children and Young People’, Available at: 
https://www.youthsporttrust.org/system/files/Evidence%20paper%20-%20The%
20impact%20of%20Covid%20restrictions%20on%20children%20and%20young
%20people%20-%20external%20report.pdf 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 | ODI AnalysesData about children’s lives during the pandemic   40 