

 

 
Executive   summary  
 
As   the   London   Datastore   prepares   to   embark   on   its   second   decade,   is   its   organisational   and  
technical   set-up   still   fit   for   purpose?   And   is   it   still   the   best   vehicle   to   equip   agencies,   local  
authorities,   companies,   organisations   and   Londoners   to   get   the   best   out   of   data,   to   inform  
better   policies   and   decision   making,   to   enable   the   creation   of   better   services   and   innovation,  
and   tackle   the   big   challenges   of   the   years   to   come?  
 
Those   are   some   of   the   questions   the   Open   Data   Institute   set   out   to   answer   by   engaging   with  
hundreds   of   people   and   organisations   on   a   three   month   discovery   project,   on   behalf   of   and   in  
close   cooperation   with   the   Datastore   team   at   the   Greater   London   Authority.   
 
Through   research,   interviews,   workshops   and   a   survey,   many   insights   emerged   about   the  
needs   of   data   stewards   and   users,   and   the   potential   of   enabling   better   access   to   high-quality,  
relevant   and   timely   data.   Some   of   those   insights,   such   as   a   need   to   improve   the   findability   of  
datasets   so   that   people   can   find   the   data   they   need,   are   similar   to   the   issues   other   stewards   of  
data   portals   and   data   platforms   are   facing   and   tackling   at   the   moment.   Others,   like   the   need   for  
increased   coordination   across   the   many   agencies,   local   authorities   and   other   data   stewards   in  
and   about   London,   are   more   specific   to   a   team   and   platform   aiming   to   create   impact   for   the  
millions   living   in,   working   in   or   visiting   the   UK’s   capital   city.  
 
Based   on   those   insights   and   existing   research,   we   recommend   six   actions   for   the   Datastore  
team   —   some   quite   tactical,   others   more   long   term   and   visionary   —   across   three   themes.   The  
themes   are   
●making   the   London   Datastore   a   better   source   for   data,   
●creating   a   destination   for   insights,   and   
●being   a   trusted   guide   and   steward   to   the   data   community.  
 
We   recommend   to:  
1.Improve   the   findability   of   the   data  
2.Increase   the   variety   and   volume   of   data   on   the   Datastore  
3.Showcase   data   reuse  
4.Document   best   practices  
5.Champion   standards   adoption   and   development  
6.Encourage   and   facilitate   collaboration   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
About   this   report  
 
This   report   has   been   researched   and   written   by   the   Open   Data   Institute   (ODI).   Its   authors   are  
Sonia   Duarte,   James   Maddison,   Olivier   Thereaux   and   Deborah   Yates   with   contributions   from  
ODI   colleagues   Leigh   Dodds,   Renate   Samson   and   Ben   Snaith.  
 
This   report   summarises   and   synthesises   material   generated   through   a   discovery   project,  
running   between   mid-September   2019   and   November   2019.   It   was   published   in   December  
2019.  
 
The   authors   would   like   to   acknowledge   the   support   from   organisations   and   individuals   who  
joined   the   workshops,   participated   in   our   public   survey   and   interviews,   and   provided   feedback  
on   the   draft   report.   This   report   would   not   exist   without   the   dozens   of   experts   who   contributed  
time   and   expertise   to   the   workshops,   interviews,   and   survey.   
 
In   particular,   we   would   like   to   thank:  
●Theo   Blackwell,   Paul   Hodgson,   Luke   Marshall-Waterfield,   Jeremy   Skinner,   Christine  
Wingfield   and,   especially,   Joseph   Colombeau   (all   GLA)   for   support   and   guidance  
throughout   the   project;  
●The   London   Office   for   Technology   and   Innovation   (LOTI)   team,   with   special   thanks   to  
director   Eddie   Copeland   for   convening   a   workshop   with   data   teams   in   London  
boroughs;  
●Paul   Neville   and   the   team   at   Waltham   Forest   Council   for   hosting   the   LOTI   workshop.  
 
 
 
This   report   is   published   under   a   Creative   Commons   Attribution-ShareAlike   4.0   International  
licence.   See:    https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0 .   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Introduction  
Context   
The   London   Datastore   is   a   data-portal   pioneer   launched   in   2010.   It   is   a   platform   where   anyone  
can   access   public   data   relating   to   London.   Its   second   iteration   in   2015   –   which   greatly  
improved   its   design   and   functionality   –   won   an   ODI   award   in   the   open   data   publishing  
1
category.  
 
As   a   model   for   access   to   data,   portals   have   proven   their   usefulness.   Whether   they   are   national,  
local   or   regional,   thematic   or   sector-focused,   they   have   been   empowering   people,   increasing  
transparency,   and   enabling   innovation.   Many   of   them,   however,   were   set   up   without  
sustainability   in   mind,   and   are   now   sitting   unloved   and   underused.  
 
The   open   data   portal   model   has   also   shown   its   limits.   It   is   now   well   understood   that   data   sits  
on   a   spectrum   between   closed   and   open,   and   that   data   stewards   can   unlock   value   by  
increasing   access   to   data   in   ways   that   will   maximise   its   value   while   minimising   potential   harmful  
impact.   The   London   Datastore   team   has   taken   steps   in   this   direction   already   by   enabling  
secure   sharing   of   data   on   the   platform.   
 
Portals   also   need   to   evolve   with   technology.   The   past   10   years   have   seen   a   rise   in   application  
programming   interfaces   (API)s,   ‘knowledge   graphs’,   improved   dataset   search,   and   an  
increasing   use   of   live   and   streaming   data.   The   ability   to   enable   the   discovery   of,   and   access   to,  
a   range   of   data   sources   will   only   become   more   important   in   the   years   to   come.   Adapting   to   this  
technological   change   will   require   independent,   trustworthy   data   governance.  
Motivation  
Defining   the   shape   and   scope   of   the   future   London   Datastore   is   challenging.   The   Datastore  
must   respond   to   the   needs   of   its   current   users   while   becoming   fit   for   purpose   for   the   future.   
 
A   discovery   phase   –   exploring   who   the   users   are   and   what   they   need,   what   data,   governance  
and   technology   exists,   and   what   the   requirements   of   the   product   may   be   –   is   a   valuable  
investment.   It   can   radically   speed   up   future   development   by   providing   clarity   and   reducing   the  
potential   waste   of   developing   unnecessary   features,   or   even   products   which   don’t   meet   user  
and   market   needs.  
 
Our   approach   for   this   discovery   phase   combined   mixed-method   research   activities   and   a  
collaborative,   iterative   approach,   to   meet   the   following   objectives   from   the   Datastore   team:  
1.To   understand   the   wider   service   that   the   London   Datastore   supports   and   what  
additional   positive   contribution   it   could   make.  
2.To   understand   the   needs   of   Datastore   users   and   potential   users   and   the   intersection  
between   this   and   your   ambitions.  
1
  Andrew   Collinge   (2015),   ‘The   Morning   after   the   Night   before:   international   recognition   for   the   London  
Datastore’,  
https://data.london.gov.uk/blog/the-morning-after-the-night-before-international-recognition-for-the-lond 
on-datastore-2/   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
3.To   define   the   mission   and   vision   for   the   London   Datastore.  
4.To   understand   the   steps   needed   to   implement   the   next   iteration   of   the   London  
Datastore.  
Methodology  
Our   approach   combined   the   expertise   of   the   ODI   in   data   technology   and   policy,   as   well   as  
creating   new   data   access   approaches   such   as   data   trusts,   with   a   robust,   mixed-method  
research   plan.   We   conducted   the   following   research   activities:  
 
Activity  
Purpose  
Desk   research  Learn   from   the   wider   data   ecosystem,   building   on  
existing   work   from   ODI   and   others.   
Four   expert   interviews  Tap   into   expertise   from   the   wider   ecosystem;   part  
of   a   collaborative   approach.   Three   interviews  
were   focused   on   data   stewards  
sharing/publishing,   with   one   interview   focusing   on  
reusers.  
Publishing-focused   practitioner   workshop  Understand   the   experience   of   data   stewards  
publishing   or   sharing   data   to   the   Datastore   or  
similar   platforms.   Identify   issues,   barriers   to  
effective   publishing   and   infer   tactical   remedies   for  
the   Datastore;   understand   needs   of   data  
stewards   to   inform   longer-term   direction.   
Data   reuse   practitioner   workshop  Understand   the   experience   of   people   and  
organisation   accessing   and   using   data   published  
or   shared   on   the   Datastore   or   similar   platforms.  
Identify   issues,   barriers   to   data   discovery   and  
use,   and   infer   tactical   remedies   for   the   Datastore;  
understand   needs   of   data   users   to   inform  
longer-term   direction.  
Workshop   with   members   of   data   teams   in  
London   boroughs    (Organised   with   London  
Office   of   Technology   and   Innovation)  
Similar   in   scope   to   the   publishing-focused  
practitioner   workshop,   but   with   a   focus   on   the  
needs   of   data   teams   in   London   boroughs.  
Public   survey  Gather   broad   qualitative   input   from   users   and  
non-users   of   the   Datastore.   The   questionnaire  
was   mainly   focused   on   the   needs   and   experience  
of   data   users.  
 
We   ran   the   project   in   close   cooperation   with   the   GLA   team   to   ensure   that   the   GLA   team   could  
get   firsthand   insight   by   being   present   in   interviews   and   workshops.   The   direction   of  
recommendations   was   also   tested   and   refined   through   a   vision   workshop   with   GLA   team  
members.    
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Findings   and   recommendations  
This   section   brings   together   findings   from   all   the   activities   in   this   discovery   phase,   focusing   on  
actionable   insights   as   much   as   possible.   A   more   comprehensive   summary   of   the   desk  
research,   workshops,   interviews   and   survey   can   be   found   in   appendices    1 ,    2 ,    3    and    4  
respectively.   
 
London   was   one   of   the   first   cities   to   recognise   the   importance   of   access   to   data   and   insights  
2
as   a   means   to   improve   decision-making,   increase   transparency,   and   enable   innovation.   In   a  
world   of   shifting   political   and   economic   priorities   and   of   fast   technological   change,   the   key   to  
the   continued   success   of   this   approach   is   to   enable   people   to   find,   access   and   use   data   about  
London   in   a   way   that   is   not   overly   dependent   on   current   administrative   boundaries   or   particular  
platforms.   
 
Defining   the   future   role   of   the   Datastore   involves   recognising   that   providing   a   data   portal   is   just  
one   aspect   of   building   a   stronger   data   infrastructure   for   the   city.   A   portal   is   a   method   of  
publishing   and   sharing   data   for   those   that   need   it,   while   offering   a   means   to   discover   a   wider  
range   of   datasets.   Making   the   portal   a   key   contributor   to   building   a   stronger   data   infrastructure  
means   building   a   community   around   it   and   developing   guidance,   standards   and   best   practices  
for   users.   Improving   the   interface   of   the   platform   itself   will   help   to   facilitate   better   discovery   and  
use   of   data,   but   creating   an   open,   trustworthy   data   ecosystem   for   London   will   require   a   broader  
set   of   activities.  
 
We   review   the   Datastore   as    an   exemplar   in   transition ,   summarising   the   many   things   it   does  
well   and   should   continue   doing,   before   presenting   our   recommendations   in   the   following  
sections.   Those   recommendations   focus   on   becoming   a    better   source   of   data ,   creating   a  
destination   for   insights    and   becoming   a    trusted   guide   and   a   steward.   
 
These   three   elements   are   not   mutually   exclusive:   the   GLA   should   pursue   all   three   in   order   to  
meet   the   varied   needs   of   the   publishers   and   users   it   is   supporting.   Based   purely   on   the   findings  
from   this   Discovery   project,   our   recommendation   is   to    prioritise   becoming   a    better   source   of  
data    and   a    trusted   guide   and   a   steward.    Investing   in   a    destination   for   insights    would   be   a  
useful   strategic   decision.  
 
GLA   should   clearly   define   and   communicate   its   direction,   in   order   to   manage   the   needs   and  
expectations   of   the   ecosystem   of   data   stewards,   users,   and   other   people   affected   by   the  
collection   and   use   of   data   in   London.   Just   as   Berlin ,   New   York   and   a   group   of   six   Finnish  
34
2
  The   Datastore   was   created   not   long   after   the   concept   of   Open   Data   was   codified,   according   to   Emer  
Coleman   (2013)   ‘Lessons   from   the   London   Datastore’   in   ‘Beyond   Transparency’,  
https://beyondtransparency.org/chapters/part-1/lessons-from-the-london-datastore/  
London   was   one   of   the   first   in   Europe,   according   to   European   Data   Portal   (2016)   ‘Open   Data   in   Cities’  
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/edp_analytical_report_n4_-_open_data_in_cities_v 
1.0_final.pdf   
3
  CITTEGO   (2018)   ‘Berlin   Open   Data   strategy’,    http://www.citego.org/bdf_fiche-document-1195_fr.html  
4
  NYC   Open   Data   (2019)   ‘Open   Data   for   All   Report’,  
https://opendata.cityofnewyork.us/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/2019_OpenDataForAllReport.pdf   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Cities   have   published   an   open   data   strategy,   London   should   clearly   set   out   its   vision   about  
5
increasing   access   to   data   across   the   data   spectrum.  
An   exemplar   in   transition  
As   one   of   the   first   city-level   open   data   portals,   the   London   Datastore   has    for   the   last   ten   years ,  
been   an   exemplar   for   other   cities.   
 
It   is   evident   that   over   the   years,   the   Datastore   has   become   an   important   part   of   London’s   data  
ecosystem,   with   around   60,000   people   a   month   using   the   portal   and   over   4000    datasets  
available   for   download   under   an   open   licence   —   with   another   2000   datasets   shared   on   the  
platform.   The   Datastore   team   has   updated   the   portal   to   meet   changing   user   needs   by   trying   to  
improve   the   experience   for   technical   users,   while   also   recognising   that   users   who   have   a   less  
technical   background   may   find   visualisations   and   analyses   more   useful   than   the   raw   data.  
 
The   research   workshops   suggested   that   the   platform   itself   does   a   good   job   as   an   open   data  
portal:   publishers   know   how   to   upload   to   the   portal   and   users   can   generally   find   data   when   it   is  
available.   The   core   features   all   were   useful   to   part   or   all   of   the   people   we   engaged   with:   access  
to   open   data;   the   creation   and   curation   of   insights   and   visualisations;   and   access   to   shared  
data   too.  
  
With   that   said   there   is   room   for   improvement,   particularly   around   search   and   navigation   as   well  
some   of   the   functionality   around   sharing   non-open   data.   The   ability   to   iterate   will   be   essential  
for   ensuring   the   Datastore   remains   fit   for   purpose   as   its   scope   evolves   from   an   open   data  
repository   to   a   central   registry   of   London’s   data.  
 
Many   of   the   difficulties   that   people   face   in   using   the   Datastore   cover   a   range   of   cultural   and  
process   barriers.   The    majority   of   the   current   technical   barriers,   some   of   which   are   outlined   in  
the   following   sections,   would   not   be   too   complicated   to   overcome.  
 
Our   research   shows   that   currently   people   have   low   expectations   of   the   Datastore   as   a   technical  
platform.   It   needs   to   ensure   that   data   is   findable,   usable   and   linked   to   related   data   and  
documentation:   the   main   purpose   of   the   Datastore   is   to   be   a   trusted   catalogue,   rather   than  
store   or   platform   for   data.  
 
The   GLA   have   begun   taking   steps   to   ensure   that   the   Datastore   is   able   to   facilitate   access   to  
data   across   the   data   spectrum   —   providing   access   to   open   data   and   encouraging   publishers  
to   be   as   open   as   possible,   and   also   offering   a   platform   for   more   controlled   sharing   of   data.   We  
believe   that   this   role,   which   will   help   to   overcome   potential   barriers   and   mitigate   risks   around  
sharing   of   data   will   only   become   more   important,   ensuring   the   relevance   and   sustainability   of  
the   Datastore   in   the   future.  
A   better   source   of   data  
Our   research   suggests   areas   where   current   features   of   the   Datastore   could   be   improved.   Many  
of   them   can   be   addressed   in   a   way   that   makes   the   Datastore   a   better   source   of   data:  
5
  6aika   ‘How   does   it   work?’    https://6aika.fi/en/what-is-6aika/how-does-it-work/  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
improving   the   findability   of   data ,   and    increasing   the   variety   and   volume   of   data  
covered   by   the   Datastore .  
 
Recommendation   1:   Improve   the   findability   of   the   data  
One   of   the   core   requirements   of   a   data   portal   is   to   help   people   find   the   data   they   need.   The  
6
existing   search   function   of   the   Datastore   allows   you   to   search   by   topic,   publisher   name,   format  
and   geography,   but   users   still   find   they   have   to   ‘click   around’   a   lot   and,   when   they   do   find   the  
data   they   need,   it   can   be   hard   to   find   it   again   on   returning   to   the   portal.   Finding   datasets   can   be  
quite   difficult   if   you   don’t   already   know   exactly   what   you’re   looking   for.   
Understanding   complaints   about   search   and   navigation  
Our   research   repeatedly   showed   a   need   for   improved   quality   and   consistency   of   data   and  
metadata   available   on   the   Datastore.   This   can,   in   part,   be   addressed   through   a   focus   on  
increasing   the   findability   of   the   data   across   all   modes   of   discovery,   including   browsing   and  
searching.  
 
“[What   would   make   the   Datastore   better]   is   an   easier   retrieval   of   data   and   search   function”  
 
“Easier   navigation   to   specific   data   sources”  
 
Participants   of   the   public   survey  
 
 
Users   identified   issues   with   navigation   and   search   as   one   of   their   major   complaints   with   the  
Datastore.   Navigation   and   tagging   are   common   problem   areas   for   data   portals,   and   it   can   be  
hard   to   keep   up   with   technological   advances   in   search   functionality.   The   City   of   New   York   has  
mitigated   this   problem   by   providing   simple   guidance   about   how   to   use   and   navigate   the  
platform   for   both   new   and   existing   users.   The   City   of   Amsterdam   has   gone   one   step   further  
7
and   embedded   clearly-defined   search   features,   and   provided   a   mechanism   for   users   to   feed  
back   about   it.   
8
Addressing   concerns   about   “outdated”   data  
There   is   a   perception   that   data   on   the   Datastore   is   ‘outdated’,   possibly   in   part   due   to   the   limited  
information   available   about   update   frequencies.   Unclear   update   frequencies   can   negatively  
affect   whether   the   data   will   be   used   to   create   impact.   As   one   user   noted:   
“We   really   need   to   know   how   often   the   data   will   be   updated   
before   we   can   really   commit   to   use   the   data”.   
 
This   issue   is   exacerbated   for   some   users   by   a   lack   of   feedback   and   engagement   mechanisms,  
which   they   feel   may   have   been   useful   as   a   way   to   ask   whether   a   dataset   is   up   to   date.   The  
analysis   section   of   the   platform   contains   links   to   descriptions   of   various   GLA   teams,   but   no  
6
  European   Data   Portal   (2017),   ‘Recommendations   for   open   data   portals:   from   set   up   to   sustainability’,  
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/edp_s3wp4_sustainability_recommendations.pdf  
7
  City   of   New   York   (2017),   Open   Data   Portal,   ‘How   to   -   Getting   Started   With   Open   Data’,  
://opendata.cityofnewyork.us/how-to/  
8
  Amsterdam   Data   and   Information,  
https://data.amsterdam.nl/artikelen/artikel/contact/c8f4d1da-75f3-4ee7-93e8-256b201d6ccf/  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
clear   information   on   how   to   engage   with   them.   This   can   make   it   hard   for   users   to   contact  
relevant   teams   with   questions,   especially   when   most   of   the   data   are   from   stewards   outside   if  
the   GLA.   
 
We   recommend   a   review   of   how   the   information   on   timeliness   of   datasets   is   presented  
throughout   the   Datastore,   with   an   emphasis   on   whether   a   dataset   is   the   latest   available:   making  
it   clearer   when   a   dataset   is   the   latest   version   available,   regardless   of   the   date   at   which   it   was  
issued.   Conversely,   datasets   superseded   by   others   should   be   clearly   marked   as   such,   and  
corrections   issued   (see   for   example   how   the   Office   for   National   Statistics   regularly   releases   and  
updates   its   key   datasets)   should   be   given   prominence   to   increase   trust   in   the   relevance   and  
timeliness   of   data   presented   on   the   Datastore.  
 
Additional   recommendations   on   engagement,   guidance   and   access   to   data   through   APIs  
(which   are   perceived   as   being   always   up   to   date)   are   addressed   in   subsequent   sections.  
Reviewing   categories   for   better   navigation  
For   a   better   browsing   experience,   we   recommend   reviewing   the   categories   used   for   navigation  
on   the   Datastore.   Participants   of   the   public   survey   pointed   out   categories   that   were   relevant   for  
them   and   weren’t   listed   on   the   Datastore   –   such   as   education,   culture   or   population   statistics.   
 
Exploring   and   testing   alternatives   with   users   and   publishers,   and   being   open   to   the   categories  
and   tags   used   for   navigation   being   a   fluid   and   evolving   set,   should   be   a   first   step   towards   better  
navigation.   
 
The   Datastore   already   provides   useful   onward   journeys   with   links   to   other   datasets   by   the   same  
publishers   and   other   related   datasets,   which   ought   to   help   with   navigation,   especially   for   users  
landing   on   a   dataset   page   from   search   results.   There   may   be   value   in   testing   the   usability   of  
those   navigation   mechanism,   and   the   perception   of   the   relevance   of   the   links   to   related  
datasets.  
 
The   main   focus   towards   better   findability   of   datasets   on   the   London   Datastore   should,   however,  
be   about   metadata   -   information   about   the   datasets   including   topic   tagging   and   descriptions.   
 
Providing   curated   guides   
Content   curation   is,   alongside   browsing   and   searching,   one   of   the   major   modes   of   discovery,  
but   one   which   is   often   underused   in   the   digital   space,   where   the   emphasis   is   on   indexing   and  
categorising   large   catalogues   to   help   people   find   what   they   know   they   are   looking   for   rather  
than   providing   guidance   and   curation   to   help   them   find   what   they   need.  
 
Just   as   we   need   well   organised   data   catalogues   and   improved   search   facilities,   we   need  
librarians   for   data   catalogues .   Curated   guides   oriented   around   common   use   cases   can   be   a  
9
cost   effective   mechanism   for   increasing   findability   of   data   (alongside,   and   possibly   ahead   of,  
efforts   to   increase   metadata   across   hundreds   of   datasets).  
9
  Joyce   L.   Ogburn   (2010)   ‘The   Imperative   for   Data   Curation’,    https://muse.jhu.edu/article/378049  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
A   good   curated   guide   can   point   to   examples   of   reuse   if   they   are   available   (see  
Recommendation   3:   Showcase   data   reuse),   but   a   guide   oriented   towards   "here   is   the   data   you  
need   for   this   challenge   and   how   to   use   it"   can   exist   before   there   are   any   examples   of   that   use.  
Reviewing   metadata   for   a   better   experience   and   more   effective   search  
Poor   and   inconsistent   metadata   is   one   of   the   major   issues   highlighted   throughout   our   findings.  
One   insight   from   user   engagement   is   that   it   can   be   hard   to   understand   the   scope   of   a   dataset  
and   any   limitations   that   might   inform   its   use.   Often   there   isn’t   enough   information   about   each  
dataset   to   help   users   to   find   out   if   it   might   be   useful   to   them   or   not.   
 
“What  [our]  organisation  needs  is  to  be  able  to  understand  that  data  in  some  depth                
[such  as]  geographical  depth,  a  sort  of  day  to  day  time  specific  depth,  etc  [...]  And  also                  
understand  how  reliable  in  itself  that  dataset  is.  And  that's  probably  why  [specific]              
business   would   typically   look   to   other   sources”   
–   User   of   open   city   data  
 
Better   metadata   should   increase   the   quality   of   search   results ,   both   for   the   internal   search  
10
engine   of   the   Datastore   and   public   search   engines,   which   are   increasing   in   importance   for  
users.   In   a   blog   post   published   in   April   2019 ,   the   Ordnance   Survey   confirmed   this   trend,  
11
writing:    Our   user   research   also   revealed   that   75%   of   users   start   their   search   for   geospatial   data  
by   using   Google.  
 
General   web   searches   for   data   will   improve   over   time   as   search   engines   increasingly   analyse  
12
the   content   and   structure   of   datasets.   In   the   short   term   however,   they   will   continue   to   rely  
heavily   on   good   quality   declarative   metadata.  
 
A   first   step   to   address   this   issue   should   be   to   audit   the   quality,   completeness   and   consistency  
of   metadata   created   for   datasets   on   the   Datastore,   review   all   documentation   and   guidance  
provided   for   publishers,   and   decide   what   minimum   threshold   of   metadata   richness   and   quality  
would   be   a   minimum   to   support   the   needs   of   users.  
 
The   London   Datastore   currently   fares   badly   in   the   amount   and   granularity   of   machine-readable  
declarative   metadata   for   the   open   datasets   it   links   to.   Using   tools   such   as   the   Google  
Structured   Data   Testing   Tool   to    improve   results   for   London   Datastore   datasets ,   and  
13
benchmarking   against   other   sites   such   as   the    Office   for   National   Statistics’    or   the    French  
Government’s    open   data   portal   should   yield   fast   and   measurable   improvements   in   findability   of  
the   Datastore’s   datasets.  
 
10
  Koesten,   Simperl   et.al.   (2018),   ‘Everything   you   always   wanted   to   know   about   a   dataset:   studies   in   data  
summarisation’,    https://export.arxiv.org/abs/1810.12423  
11
  Geospatial   Commission   Data   Discoverability   –   making   geospatial   data   easier   to   find   (2019),  
https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/blog/2019/04/geospatial-commission-data-discoverability-making-ge 
ospatial-data-easier-to-find/  
12
  Chapman,   Simperl,   Koesten   et.al   (2019),   ‘Dataset   search:   a   survey’  
https://export.arxiv.org/abs/1901.00735  
13
  Google’s   Structured   Data   Testing   Tool,    https://search.google.com/structured-data/testing-tool   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
This   recommendation   for   better   metadata   applies   equally   to   both   open   and   shared   data  
catalogued   in   the   Datastore.   While   there   are   occasional   privacy   or   sensitivity   concerns,  
documenting   the   existence   of   data,   even   if   access   is   restricted,   is   generally   safe.   Cataloguing  
data   across   the   spectrum   can   help   drive   discovery   and   increase   reuse,   provided   there   is   also   a  
clear   and   transparent   way   to   request   access.   
 
This   focus   on   increasing   the   findability   of   data,   regardless   of   whether   it   is   stored   and   available  
on   the   datastore   itself,   would   lead   to   the   Datastore   becoming   more   of   a    central   registry  
facilitating   access   to   data   than   a   store   of   data.   
Recommendation   2:   Increase   the   variety   and   volume   of   data   on   the   Datastore  
In   addition   to   its   original   remit   around   providing   access   to   public   and   open   data,   the   Datastore  
has   increasingly   been   used   to   provide   and   manage   access   to   shared   data.   
Engaging   with   the   community   to   prioritise   which   data   to   add  
Understanding   user   priorities   and   using   this   to   identify   data   to   publish   can   be   hard,   and   the  
majority   of   data   is   shared   by   borough   Councils   in   response   to   a   legal   or   statutory   need,   rather  
than   being   user   driven.   
14
 
“We   want   to   make   sure   that   the   time   and   effort   spent   to   publish   the   data   
Is   relevant   and   useful   for   others.”  
–Participant   on   the   public   survey  
 
The   publishers   we   talked   to   would   like   to   better   understand   the   needs   of   users   of   the   London  
Datastore.   Insight   into   who   users   are   and   what   they   do   with   different   types   of   data   could   help  
publishers   to   prioritise   the   data   they   provide,   and   the   way   they   provide   it.   
 
The   Datastore   team   should   explore   mechanisms   to   increase   user   engagement   and   input   into  
what   data   (and   insights)   ought   to   be   made   available.   
 
The   most   effective   approach   is   a   problem-   or   challenge-based   one:   working   with   data   users  
and   people   affected   to   identify   a   problem   which   data   can   help   solve,   and   then   increasing  
access   to   the   data   required   to   solve   it.   Focusing   on   challenges   rather   than   simply   creating  
inventories   of   data   is   more   likely   to   yield   reuse .   
15
 
The   London   Datastore   already   does   this   in   some   cases:   work   on   the   Night   Time   Observatory  
16
will   bring   together   boroughs   (users)   and   GLA   (publishers)   to   publish   data   on   the   night   time  
economy   to   aid   the   boroughs   in   creating   their   night   time   strategies.   
 
14
  GovEx   Labs   (2019),   ‘Open   Data   Portal   Requirements’,  
https://labs.centerforgov.org/open-data/portal-requirements/  
15
  Open   Data   Charter   (2018),   ‘Publishing   with   Purpose’,  
https://medium.com/@opendatacharter/publishing-with-purpose-introducing-our-2018-strategy-ddbf7ab 
46098   
16
   London   Night   Time   Commission   (Jan   2019)   ‘Think   Night:   London's   Neighbourhoods   from   6pm   to  
6am’,    https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/ntc_report_online.pdf   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
A   recent   report   by   the   European   Data   Portal   showcases   a   number   of   ways   national   data  
17
portals   across   Europe   have   been   involving   a   broad   community   in   prioritising   what   data   to  
collect,   publish   and   make   available.   Once   set   up   and   well   taken   care   of,   such   a   community   can  
be   an   invaluable   asset   in   understanding   where   issues   lie   —   in   particular   around   data   quality   —  
and   get   a   much   better   view   of   the   return   on   investment   for   the   platform.   
 
See   also    Recommendation   3:   Showcase   data   reuse    for   another   way   to   address   the   need   for  
publishers   to   better   understand   what   data   users   need   and   what   they   do   with   the   data.  
Enabling   more   technical   means   of   access  
Another   dimension   which   should   be   considered   in   expanding   the   variety   and   volume   of   data   is  
about   the   variety   of   technical   modes   of   access.   
 
For   example,   many   data   users   who   participated   in   this   research   were   used   to   accessing   data  
through   query   APIs   or   streaming   APIs,   especially   for   real-time   sensor   data,   and   were   critical   of   a  
platform   built   mainly   around   static   datasets.   
 
“Because   of   the   business   we're   in,   the   technology   is   changing.   [...]   we   are   switching   from   static  
to   real   time   and   predictive   data”  
–Publisher   of   city   data  
 
“Most   of   [London   Datastore   data]   is   fairly   static.   Transport   API   requires   considerable   technical  
expertise   to   engage   with   it”  
–Participant   on   the   public   Survey  
 
We   recommend   considering   this   feedback   in   planning   the   future   of   the   Datastore,   but   with  
nuance.   In   early   2018,   an   ODI   team   wrote   about   the   experience   of   working   with   open   data   from  
the   perspective   of   a   private   sector   application   developer   and   concluded   that   dual   access   to  
18
data   —   via   both   APIs   and   the   availability   for   download   of   frequent   snapshots   of   the   data,   was  
often   preferable   to   only   providing   APIs   or   only   static   data.  
Continuing   the   exploration   of   alternative   access   models  
The   London   Datastore   should   continue   in   its   efforts   to   increase   access   to   data   across   the  
whole   spectrum   from   shared   to   open.   There   is   a   significant   role   for   the   GLA   to   play   in   exploring  
new   models   for   access   to   data   —   such   as   data   trusts,   which   the   GLA   was   a   pioneer   in   piloting  
—,   new   institutional   approaches   to   stewarding   and   managing   access   to   data,   and   working   to  
support   sharing   across   a   wider   group   of   organisations.   
19
  
It   is   important   to   recognise   that   there   are   a   variety   of   models   for   increasing   access   to   data   (see  
for   example,   The   ODI’s   Data   Access   Map ).   Rather   than   adopting   a   one-size-fits-all   approach  
20
the   GLA   and   its   partners   should   test   which   models   work   best   to   address   specific   challenges,  
17
   Open   Data   Portal   (2018)   ‘Open   Data   Maturity   in   Europe’,  
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/edp_landscaping_insight_report_n4_2018.pdf  
18
  Open   Data   Institute   (2018)   ‘Prototyping   with   open   sports   data’  
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/   
19
  Open   Data   Institute,   ‘Mapping   the   wide   world   of   data   sharing’,  
https://theodi.org/project/the-data-access-map/  
20
  Open   Data   Institute   (2019)   ‘The   Data   Access   Map’,    https://theodi.org/project/the-data-access-map  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
and   ensure   these   models   can   be   catalogued   and/or   accessed   via   the   Datastore.   Exploring   new  
models   should   include   a   focus   on   building   strong   governance   around   data,   rather   than   merely  
investing   in   technical   platforms.  
 
For   the   GLA’s   own   work,   data   access   needs   vary   from   project   to   project   and   new   solutions   may  
only   be   required   temporarily.   When   exploring   the   infrastructure   needed   to   enable   new   access  
models,   the   Datastore   should   use   open   source   alternatives   where   possible,   rather   than   creating  
new   software   or   relying   on   long   term   agreements   with   suppliers.  
A   destination   for   insights  
The   Datastore   already   offers   narratives   and   insights,   which   is   one   of   the   ways   it   caters   for   a  
diverse   audience   of   technical   and   non-technical   data   users,   creating   value   from   the   data   held   in  
the   Datastore,   and   making   a   case   for   the   use   of   that   data.  
Highlighting   insights,   but   not   at   the   expense   of   data   access  
Insights   from   the   research   confirmed   the   need   to   walk   the   tightrope   of   aiming   to   be   useful   to   a  
very   diverse   set   of   users,   while   not   failing   to   serve   them   by   trying   to   be   ‘everything   to   all  
people’.   Analysis   and   insight   are   time   consuming,   costly,   and   rely   on   different   skills   to   those  
required   to   manage   an   effective   source   of   data.   
 
While   the   two   objectives   of   creating   valuable   insights   and   giving   effective   access   to   data   are   not  
mutually   exclusive,   the   focus   on   one   could   affect   budget   dedicated   to   the   other.   Too   much  
importance   given   to   generating   insights   from   data   may   distract   attention   from   the   necessary  
work   of   improving   how   it   can   be   accessed,   used   and   shared.  
 
Although   GLA   needs   a   space   to   host   insights   to   address   its   own   needs,   responses   from   the  
public   survey   show   that   75%   of   participants   typically   access   information   about   London   by  
downloading   data   and   only   50%   does   it   through   by   accessing   ready-made   insights.    We   would  
recommend   engaging   further   with   GLA   data   science   teams   developing   data   insights   to  
understand   their   specific   needs   when   publishing   insights   (and   data)   from   specific   projects.  
Recommendation   3:   Showcase   data   reuse  
There   is   undoubted   value   in   showcasing   usage   of   the   data,   both   as   an   exemplar   for   future  
users   and   as   a   tangible   demonstration   of   some   of   the   impact   created   by   increasing   access   to  
this   data.   
Working   with   a   community   of   data   users  
This   does   not   have   to   be   done   through   a   heavy   investment   to   generate   all   the   insights   and  
analysis   of   the   data   in-house,   but   instead   can   benefit   from   a   collaborative,   community-focused  
approach.   
 
The   blog   section   currently   on   the   Datastore   platform   provides   an   opportunity   for   people   to  
share   their   stories,   experiences   and   calls   to   action   concerning   data   about   London,   however   the  
range   of   content   listed   is   currently   very   broad   and   difficult   to   navigate   which   may   limit   the  
impact   and   insights   that   can   be   drawn   from   it.   
 
“   [The   Datastore   would   be   more   useful]   with   show   and   tell   examples   of   how   people   use   it.”  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
 
–Participant   on   the   public   Survey  
 
By   working   effectively   with   the   community   of   data   users,   the   Datastore   would   not   only   host  
analysis   and   insights   generated   by   its   internal   team,   but   should   also   showcase   interesting   uses  
of   the   data.   As   for   the   generation   of   insights   and   analysis,   this   curatorial   work   can   be   done   by   a  
dedicated   team,   or   it   can   leverage   the   enthusiasm   of   the   community   by   encouraging   data   users  
to   showcase   their   work   on   the   platform.   The   open   data   platform   of   the   French   government,  
data.gouv.fr,   includes   a    reuse   section    where   community   members   can   document   their   use   of  
the   data   on   the   platform,   and   thus   provide    examples   of   the   many   ways   each   data   set   can   be  
useful .   Several   examples   of   successful   innovative   data   reuse   in   city   portals   are   listed   in   the    Desk  
Research   Summary .  
 
Such   an   approach   is   likely   to   become   the   norm:   the   2018   Open   Data   Maturity   in   Europe  
21
report   from   the   European   Data   Portal   highlights   that   “21   portals   (81%)   have   a   designated   area  
to   promote   Open   Data   use   cases”   (and   in   20   of   these   cases,   the   portal   allows   reusers   to  
upload   their   reuse   examples)   but   also   notes   that   for   now,   “National   Open   Data   portals   seem   to  
be   reluctant   to   enable   the   broader   involvement   of   the   Open   Data   community   on   the   national  
portal”.   
 
This   kind   of   community-generated   information   does   not,   obviously,   mean   free   content:   the  
platform   team   moderates   submissions,   and   provides   high   quality    documentation ,   guidance   and  
tools   for   the   community   to   effectively   curate   and   document   examples   of   data   use.   Building  
expertise   in   collaborative   maintenance   of   information   through   a   community   can   be   a   challenge  
but   guidance   is   available   from   the   ODI   and   others .  
2223
 
A   trusted   guide   and   steward  
This   third   theme   was   the   one   most   consistently   addressed   across   all   discovery   activities   in   this  
process.   There   was   a   near-unanimous   demand   for   quality   and   consistency,   and,   especially,   for  
guidance   and   standards   from   publishers.  
 
“I   fully   trust   the   Datastore   on   security,   privacy,   etc.   
I   am   not   sure   about   the   quality   of   third-party   data,   how   consistent   it   is,   etc”  
–Participant   on   the   public   survey  
 
That   focus   is   not   typical   of   what   data   portals   or   platforms   offer.   Providing   extra   help   and  
support   to   data   stewards   and   users,   convening   communities   and   leading   on   standards   is   not,  
strictly   speaking,   necessary   for   the   efficient   operation   of   a   data   portal   or   platform,   but   it   can  
create   the   right   conditions   for   the   platform   to   reach   its   potential.   In   other   words,   standards,  
guidance   and   best   practices   are   part   of   building   a   stronger   data   infrastructure,   but   they   are  
often   overlooked   due   to   a   focus   on   technical   platforms.  
21
  Open   Data   Portal   (2018)   ‘Open   Data   Maturity   in   Europe’,  
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/edp_landscaping_insight_report_n4_2018.pdf  
22
  Open   Data   Institute   (2019)   ‘Collaborative   Data   Patterns’    https://collaborative-data.theodi.org/  
23
  See   e.g.   Wikidata    https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Community_portal  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
 
To   increase   its   role   and   standing   as   a   trusted   guide   and   steward,   the   London   Datastore   and   the  
GLA   should   address   the   following   key   areas,   which   make   up   our   final   three   recommendations.   
Recommendation   4:   Document   best   practices  
Documentating   and   highlighting   best   practices   gives   guidance   to   data   stewards   and   users,   it  
also   shows   them   what   ‘good’   looks   like.   
Clarifying   what   ‘good   enough’   looks   like  
Not   knowing   acceptable   thresholds   of   quality   and   what   constitutes   excellent   to   aim   for   is,   as  
documented   in   the   2018   ODI   report   ‘What   data   publishers   need’ ,   one   of   the   main   causes   of  
24
anxiety   and   paralysis   for   open   data   publishers.  
 
An   earlier   recommendation   focused   on   increasing   the   quality   and   consistency   of   metadata.  
Better   guidance   for   data   stewards   on   the   platform   will   not   only   help   with   this   goal,   it   will   also  
address   a   concern   we   observed   in   our   engagement   with   publishers:   there   is   a   perceived  
absence   of   guidance   to   tell   individuals   how   to   describe   data   (metadata),   how   to   name   fields  
within   the   data   or   what   ‘quality   data’   looks   like.   There   is   no   clear   minimum   standard   for  
publishing   to   the   Datastore.   Guidance   and   training   can   help   individuals   be   confident   that   they  
are   doing   the   right   thing.   
Providing   guidance   for   data   users  
There   is   a   recognition   that   the   quality   of   available   data   varies,   and   the   absence   of   contact  
points   makes   it   hard   to   raise   concerns   about   data   quality   with   publishers.   
 
Users   want   better   guidance   and   communications   as   a   priority.   Examples   from   Vancouver,   who  
have   produced   a    guide   for   new   and   advanced   users ,   Boston,   who   provide   a   ‘ starter   kit ’   and  
video   guides ,   and   San   Francisco,   who   have   an   associated    data   academy ,   which   provides   free  
eLearning   courses   about   data   and   the   portal   for   public   sector   employees,   could   help   inform   an  
approach.  
Providing   active   publisher   support  
Creating   a   comprehensive   body   of   documentation   and   guidance   does   not   replace   active   and  
direct   support   for   publishers.   Guidance   takes   many   forms,   some   of   it   at   scale,   other   ad-hoc  
and   human.  
 
Some   of   this   support   should   be   proactive,   aiming   to   upskill   data   practitioners   across   London   to  
publish,   share,   and   use   data   better   to   make   better   decisions   and   enable   innovation.   A   skills  
programme,   building   on   the   Data   Skills   Framework   could   be   attached   to   the   Datastore   to  
25
ensure   quality   and   consistency,   and   foster   creativity   and   impact   in   data   access   and   use.  
 
Building   better   publication   tools   into   the   platform   to   help   publishers   organise   and   prepare   data  
for   release   should   also   be   seen   as   part   of   providing   proactive   support.   Building   best   practices  
into   guidance   can   help   embed   good   practice   into   day   to   day   operations.  
24
   Open   Data   Institute   (2018),   ‘What   data   publishers   need:   synthesis   of   user   research’,  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/14vZJFUEJOkJEGOFTAPjRZ2FYxZfLQX3ct48K7bNsyl4/edit#hea 
ding=h.b3lnabharl6t  
25
  Open   Data   Institute,   ‘Data   Skills   Framework’    https://theodi.org/article/open-data-skills-framework/  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Recommendation   5:   Champion   standards   adoption   and   development  
there   are   33   local   authority   districts   in   Greater   London,   and   many   other   agencies   and  
organisations   publishing   or   sharing   data   to   the   Datastore.   It   is   unlikely   that   consistency   of  
practice   will   emerge   organically   without   some   kind   of   coordination   and   convening.   
 
There   is   no   standardisation   between   boroughs   and   other   agencies   publishing   to   the   platform,   in  
terms   of   the   data   provided,   formats,   structure,   or   descriptions.   This   can   make   it   hard   to  
compare   and   combine   data   from   different   boroughs.   As   some   interviewees   and   participants   of  
the   survey   mentioned,   providers   of   data   to   the   Datastore   often   publish   in   other   locations   (e.g.  
their   own   websites,   other   portals),   which   can   make   it   hard   for   users   to   know   whether   they   have  
the   most   relevant   data   as   they   need   to   search   multiple   places.   
 
The   lack   of   consistency   in   the   data   affects   the   time   users   spend   matching   and   standardising  
datasets.   Participants   at   the   user   workshop   suggested   it   would   be   helpful   for   the   GLA   to   play   a  
role   in   defining   standards   for   data   published   on   the   Datastore,   in   order   to   help   them   integrate  
data   from   multiple   sources   for   use   in   their   analyses,   products   and   services.   This   is   related   to  
Recommendation   3:   Showcase   data   reuse .  
 
The   term   “standards”   can   mean   many   things,   and   we   are   using   it   here   with   a   broad   definition,  
including   the   many   activities   and   initiatives   which   can   be   undertaken   to   increase   consistency  
and   interoperability:   from   simple   documentation   of   common   practices   (standards   of   quality),   to  
the   adoption   of   specific   tools   and   formats   (technical   standards),   all   the   way   to   the   development  
of   new   open   standards   for   data.   The   Open   Standards   for   Data   guidebook   provides   guidance  
26
on   many   of   those   activities,   with   recommendations   on   how   to   find   and   adopt   standards,   all   the  
way,   when   needed,   to   developing   new   ones.   
 
In   practice,   we   recommend   the   following   first   steps:  
●Review   the   data   currently   published   across   GLA  
●Identify   areas   for   standardisation  
●Start   building   a   peer   network   of   people   to   discuss   and   agree   on   standards  
Recommendation   6:   Encourage   and   facilitate   collaboration  
Many   of   the   organisations   surveyed   through   this   project   see   the   value   in   the   Datastore   as   a  
discovery   tool,   rather   than   solely   fulfilling   a   role   as   a   technical   platform.   These   organisations   use  
the   Datastore   to   discover   which   other   organisations   in   London   are   sharing   data   and   to   identify  
potential   collaborations.   Some   of   the   organisations   who   took   part   wanted   to   see   the   GLA   help  
connecting   different   organisations   who   could   be   collaborators.   
 
There   are   a   number   of   organisations   across   London   who   are   already   supporting   collaboration  
and   innovation   around   data.   The   London   Office   for   Technology   and   Innovation   (LOTI)   are  
working   closely   with   London   boroughs   to   run   a    variety   of   projects   around   data ,   such   as  
reviewing   borough   approaches   to   the   ethical   use   of   AI   and   data,   engaging   with   schools   to   raise  
student’s   aspirations   in   technology   and    improving   the   visibility   of   procurement   activities    across  
London   authorities.   
26
  Open   Data   Institute   ‘Open   Standards   for   Data   Guidebook’,    https://standards.theodi.org/   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
 
The   Ministry   for   Housing,   Communities   and   Local   Government   (MHCLG)   are   supporting   local  
authorities,   not   just   in   London   but   across   England,   to   improve   digital   skills   and   fund  
collaborative   projects   such   as    improving   data   standards   for   local   community   based   services ,  
through   the    Local   Digital   Fund .   LocalGov   Digital   are   aiming   to   support   the   visibility   of   local  
authority   projects   through   their    Pipeline    in   order   to   aid   innovation   and   collaboration   across   the  
public   sector.  
 
Initiatives   such   as   these   show   that   not   all   the   support   and   coordination   of   data   publishing,  
sharing   and   use   needs   to   be   undertaken   by   the   Datastore   team.   Encouraging   collaboration   –  
through   convening,   setting   challenges   to   resolve   specific   problems,   and   resource   sharing   –   is  
one   way   to   rely   on   the   community   to   take   care   of   itself   and   create   impact   at   scale.   
 
Sharing   beyond   London  
Fostering   collaboration   is   the   reasonable   approach   to   dealing   with   many   challenges   common   to  
the   various   agencies   and   boroughs   of   London.   For   the   same   reason,   efforts   should   be   made   to  
collaborate   closely   with   other   city   and   city-region   data   initiatives   to   address   common  
challenges.   
 
In   our   engagement   with   users,   we   noted   a   user   need   for   alignment   between   the   London  
Datastore   and   other   platforms,   especially   when   using   data   to   make   decisions   or   solve   problems  
at   a   scale   broader   than   London   itself.   In   one   case,   workshop   participants   expressed   the   desire  
for   the   London   Datastore   to   enable   discovery   of   data   about   neighbouring   regions   —   which   we  
understand   to   be   the   expression   of   the   same   user   need.   
 
The   GLA   are   already   thinking   about   the    data   infrastructure   requirements    for   cities   to   be   able   to  
effectively   share   data,   through   projects   like   the    Sharing   Cities    initiative.   The   London   Datastore  
could   be   embedded   into   these   types   of   projects,   so   that   the   sharing   capabilities   of   the   platform  
develop   and   align   with   other   city   data-sharing   platforms.   
 
The    Desk   Research   Summary    includes   a   number   of   examples   of   city   data   portal   teams   working  
collaboratively   with   other   public   sector   organisations,   industry   or   communities   to   establish   new  
data   sharing   initiatives,   or   joining   forces   between   similar   cities.    
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Summary   of   Recommendations  
Below   is   a   recap   of   the   themes   and   recommendations   (1-6),   with   a   reminder   of   the   suggested  
paths   to   implementation.   
Become   a    better   source   of   data  
(High   priority,   short   to   mid-term )  
1.Improve   the   findability   of   the   data  
a.Understand   complaints   about   search   and   navigation  
b.Address   concerns   about   “outdated”   data  
c.Review   categories   for   better   navigation  
d.Provide   curated   guides  
e.Review   metadata   for   a   better   experience   and   more   effective   search  
 
2.Increase   the   variety   and   volume   of   data   on   the   Datastore  
a.Engage   with   the   community   to   prioritise   which   data   to   add  
b.Enable   more   technical   means   of   access  
c.Continue   the   exploration   of   alternative   access   models  
Invest   in    a   destination   for   insights  
(Slightly   lower   priority,   short   to   mid-term)  
3.Showcase   data   reuse  
a.Work   with   a   community   of   data   users  
b.Highlight   insights,   but   not   at   the   expense   of   data   access  
Become   a    trusted   guide   and   steward  
(High   priority,   short   to   longer   term)  
4.Document   best   practices  
a.Clarify   what   “good   enough”   looks   like  
b.Provide   guidance   for   data   users  
c.Provide   active   publisher   support  
 
5.Champion   standards   adoption   and   development  
a.Review   the   data   currently   published   across   GLA  
b.Identify   areas   for   standardisation  
c.Build   a   peer   network   of   people   to   discuss   and   agree   on   standards  
 
6.Encourage   and   facilitate   collaboration  
a.Share   beyond   London  
  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Appendix   1:   Desk   research   summary  
Approach  
Desk   research   was   conducted   throughout   the   discovery   phase.   Early   desk   research   helped   to  
inform   some   of   the   structure   for   both   the   user   and   publisher   workshops,   as   well   as   the  
interviews.   Subsequent   desk   research   helped   to   provide   evidence   that   supports   the   findings  
from   the   user   research,   in   order   to   inform   this   report’s    recommended   short   term   changes    to  
the   Datastore,   as   well   as    suggestions   for   longer   term   strategic   plans.   
 
Aside   from   general   research   about   the   current   London   Datastore   offering,   the   bulk   of   the   desk  
research   focused   on   these   topic   areas:  
 
●Guidance   around   best   practices   for   data   portals   and   platforms  
●Interesting   examples   of   data   portals   and   platforms   beyond   the   London   Datastore  
●City   level   data   strategies   which   support   city   data   portals   and   platforms  
Summary   of   findings  
Guidance   around   best   practices   for   data   portals   and   platforms  
Researching   the   landscape   of   existing   guidance   was   a   necessary   first   step   towards   ensuring  
that   the   proposed   user   research   approach   did   not   overlook   any   widely   established  
recommendations.   
 
As   the   London   Datastore   primarily   functions   as   an   open   data   portal ,   most   of   the   relevant  
27
guidance   for   this   discovery   phase   focuses   on   guidance   around   open   data   portals,   rather   than  
platforms.   According   to   the   Recommendations   for   open   data   portals:   from   setup   to  
sustainability   report,   the   purpose   of   an   open   data   portal   is   to:  
28
 
●help   people   find   the   data   they   need,  
●ensure   that   data   accessed   via   the   portal   continues   to   be   relevant,   useful   and   usable,  
●monitor   and   improve   the   quality   and   timeliness   of   data   accessed   via   the   portal,  
●keep   pace   with   data   technologies   and   services,   and   user   needs,   as   they   evolve.   
 
Open   data   portals   are   primarily   concerned   with   helping   users   to   access,   use   and   share   the  
data,   so   good   open   data   portals   must   be   designed   to   make   it   as   easy   as   possible   for   users   to  
engage   with   them.   Consistent   themes   from   various   sources   of   guidance   ( An   evaluation   of   U.S.  
municipal   open   data   portals )   ( GovEx   Labs:   Open   Data   Portal   Requirements )   suggest   that   there  
are   five   different   factors   that   portal   owners   should   consider   in   order   to   enable   users   to   get   the  
best   value   from   their   portal:   
27
  Leigh   Dodds   (2015)   ‘What   is   a   Data   Portal’,  
https://blog.ldodds.com/2015/10/13/what-is-a-data-portal/   
28
  European   Data   Portal   (2017),   ‘ Recommendations   for   open   data   portals:   from   setup   to  
sustainability’,  
https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/edp_s3wp4_sustainability_recommendati 
ons.pdf   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
 
●accessibility   and   availability   of   data  
●trust   in   the   data   available  
●guidance   to   help   users   understand   how   to   use   the   portal   and   the   data  
●tools   that   help   people   to   engage   with   and   integrate   data   from   the   portal  
●provision   for   users   to   participate   and   give   feedback  
 
Portal   owners   should   also   plan   for   portals   to   be   sustainable,   by   making   sure   that   they:  
 
●establish   good   governance  
●have   a   funding   strategy  
●build   strong   data   infrastructure  
●continue   to   maintain   and   improve   operations  
●capture   metrics   of   use  
 
All   of   the   considerations   that   apply   to   open   data   portals   are   also   relevant   to   different   data  
sharing   models;    good   data   infrastructure    requires   people,   processes   and   technology   that   can  
support   the   data   assets,   regardless   of   where   that   data   exists   on    the   Data   Spectrum .   However,  
while   open   data   portals   appear   to   be   a   fairly   well   defined   model   with   significant   guidance  
around   set   up,   best   practices   and   sustainability,   the   requirements   for   a   good   data   sharing  
platform   are   harder   to   define.   As   the    ODI’s   Mapping   Data   Access    project   outlines,   the   data  
sharing   landscape   is   complex   and   finding   an   approach   that   suits   the   requirements   of   a   specific  
situation   can   be   difficult.  
 
Self-assessment   against   recommendations   from   desk   research  
As   part   of   the   desk   research   work,   the   Datastore   team   evaluated   their   current   operations  
against   the   recommendations   of   two   significant   reports   on   data   portals:   the   European   Data  
Portal   project   ‘From   Setup   to   Sustainability’   and   the   US   GovEx   Labs’   ‘Open   Data   Portal  
Requirements’ .   The   self-assessment   was   mainly   positive,   and   yielded   the   following   insights:  
29
 
●The   Datastore   does   not   have   a   business   plan,   documented   governance   structure   or  
published   funding   information,   but   one   of   the   goals   of   this   project   and   its   future   phases  
is   to   create   a   clear   plan   for   the   long   term   sustainability   of   the   Datastore.  
●Standards   for   quality   and   metadata   are   not   set.   This   is   consistent   with   insights   from   the  
research   activities,   pointing   to   a   need   for   the   clear   definition   of   standards   and   firm  
enforcement   of   quality   baselines.  
●The   current   platform   does   not   enable   searching   for   datasets   by   terms   contained   in   the  
data.   This   is   a   common   problem   with   the   current   generation   of   data   platforms   and  
portals,   but   the   acceleration   of   development   and   investment   in   data   search   from   the  
likes   of   Google   is   likely   to   make   this   a   must-have   feature   in   the   near   future.   
29
  GovEx   Labs   (2015)   ‘Open   Data   Portal   Requirements’,  
https://labs.centerforgov.org/open-data/portal-requirements/   
 
 
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
●A   number   of   recommended   features   are   not,   at   this   point,   implemented   on   the   platform.  
These   include   the   ability   for   data   users   to   download   data   in   bulk,   and   the   ability   for  
platform   administrators   to   track   and   analyse   consumer   feedback.  
Other   data   portals   and   platforms   beyond   the   London   Datastore  
A   number   of   city   and   national   open   data   portals   around   the   world   take   unique   approaches   to  
improving   user   experience   in   key   areas.   
 
There   are   a   few   good   examples   of   open   data   platforms   with   design   features   to    make   the  
platforms   more   usable .  
●Plymouth’s   open   data   portal   has   a    separate   insights   section    with   search   capabilities,  
which   can   help   users   to   easily   find   relevant   visualisations   and   tools.  
●The    San   Francisco   open   data   portal    gives   users   the   option   to   receive   a   dataset   alert,  
when   new   datasets   that   are   relevant   to   them   become   available   or   when   existing  
datasets   are   updated.   
 
Some   open   data   portals,   particularly   in   the   US,   have    created   guidance   for   users    which   can  
help   them   to   navigate   the   portal.  
●The    New   York   open   data   portal    provides   some   simple   guidance   about   how   to   use   the  
platform.  
●The    Vancouver   open   data   portal    has   a   clear   guide   for   new   users   of   the   portal,   as   well   as  
an   advanced   guide   for   technical   users.   
●The    Boston   open   data   portal    provides    a   starter   kit    which   helps   users   to   understand   the  
terminology   around   data   and   to   think   about   how   they   could   use   the   data.   The   Boston  
team   has   also   produced   a   number   of   how-to   video   guides   which   help   users   to   navigate  
the   portal.   
 
Many   open   data   portals   include   a   dedicated   section   to    showcase   innovative   uses   of   data  
from   the   portal.   
●For   national   open   data   portals   in   the   EU,   such   as    France’s    portal,   it   is   now   common  
practice   to   include   a   showcase   section.  
●Barcelona   open   data   portal .  
●Boston    and    San   Francisco   portals .  
 
A   few   open   data   portals   have   good    built   in   feedback   mechanisms    and    actively   work   with  
users    to   engage   with   the   data.   
●The    Amsterdam   open   data   portal    has   a   prominent   feedback   section.  
●Data   Plymouth    organise   meetups   and   events   for   people   who   are   interested   in   using   the  
data   that   is   published   on   the   Plymouth   open   data   portal.  
●Paris   has   its   own   meetup   group   called    Paris   Open   Innovation,   although   the   group  
focuses   more   broadly   on   digital   transformation   in   Paris,   not   just   on   the   use   of   data   from  
the   portal.   
●Barcelona   open   data   portal    uses    Decidim    to   engage   citizens   in   conversations   around  
data.  
 
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Other   cities   are    working   collaboratively   with   other   public   sector   organisations,   industry  
or   communities    to   establish   new   data   sharing   initiatives.   
●The   Copenhagen    City   Data   Exchange    project   has   created   a   data   hub   to   try   to   establish  
a   data   marketplace   where   the   public   and   private   sectors   can   exchange   datasets.  
●In   New   York,   the   Mayor’s   Office   of   Data   Analytics   (MODA),   the   Department   of  
Information   Technology   and   Telecommunications   (DOITT),   and   NYC   Digital   have    worked  
together   to   establish   a   city-wide   data   sharing   platform ,   DataBridge.  
●Milton   Keynes   has   developed    MK   Data   Hub ,   the   technical   infrastructure   for   their  
MK:Smart   project.   The   Data   Hub   has   helped   them   to   create   a   data   marketplace,   where  
open   and   shared   datasets   are   stored   and   can   be   accessed   under   specific   terms.  
●Cities   such   as   Malaga   and   Porto   are   using   the    Industrial   Data   Spaces    infrastructure   to  
share   data   with,   and   access   data   from,   fleet   operators,   to   help   improve   traffic   flow   in  
their   respective   cities.  
 
GovLab’s    Data   Collaboratives   Explorer    points   to   a   multitude   of   other   examples   of   data   access  
approaches   where   public   and   private   sector   organisations   are   sharing   data   for   public   benefit.  
 
City   level   data   strategies   which   support   city   data   portals   and   platforms  
Across   Europe,   national   open   data   portals   have   been   widely   implemented.   As   of   the   2018  
edition   of   European   Data   Portal’s    Open   Data   Maturity   in   Europe   report ,   26   of   the   28   member  
states   of   the   European   Union   have   their   own   national   open   data   portals,   and   81%   of   these  
countries   have   dedicated   open   data   policies   which   cover   the   next   five   years.   For   most   of   these  
countries,   these   policies   are   embedded   as   part   of   a   larger   digital   or   open   government   strategy.   
 
In   a   number   of   these   member   states,   one   or   more   major   cities   have   also   created   their   own  
open   data   portals.   The   European   Data   Portal   conducted    a   study   in   2016    which   examined  
Europe’s   top   eight   open   data   cities   based   on   best   practices:   Amsterdam,   Barcelona,   Berlin,  
Copenhagen,   Paris,   Stockholm,   Vienna,   and   London.   All   of   these   cities   had   created   their   own  
open   data   portals   and   strategies,   but   were   also   considering   open   data   to   be   an   integral   part   of  
their   smart   city   strategies.   A    follow   up   study   in   2017    examined   seven   more   European   cities   that  
had   established   good   practices:   Dublin;   Ghent;   Florence;   Helsinki;   Thessaloniki;   Lisbon   and  
Vilnius.   These   cities   produced   open   data   strategies   as   well,   and   had   a   similar   focus   to   those   in  
the   first   study,   with   their   focuses   centring   on   increasing   efficiencies   across   the   city   by   improving  
connectivity,   as   well   as   being   more   transparent   with   city   data.   
 
The   2017   follow   up   study   makes   a   number   of   recommendations   for   cities   who   are   establishing  
open   data   initiatives:   
●embed   open   data   initiatives   into   wider   smart   city   strategies;   
●focus   on   meeting   the   demands   of   users   by   making   data   that   users   value   available   at   a  
city   level;  
●overcome   skills   or   resource   gaps   by   collaborating   with   other   cities;   
●show   the   practical   use   of   open   data   through   use   cases   and   describe   the   value;   
●engage   with   the   user   community   by   running   community   events;   
●build   strong   commitment   from   senior   stakeholders   who   can   support   the   open   data  
initiative;   
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
●coordinate   on   the   topic   of   access   to   data   at   a   national   level   with   local   and   regional  
authorities   to   overcome   cultural,   technical,   financial   and   capacity   barriers.  
 
Some   cities   within   the   same   country   are   working   together   to   establish   better   strategies   around  
open   data   and   smart   cities.   In   Finland,   the    6Aika    -   also   referred   to   as   the   Six   City   Strategy   -   is   a  
collaborative   effort   between   the   cities   of   Helsinki,   Espoo,   Tampere,   Vanta,   Turkuu   and   Oulu   to  
work   on   a   number   of   projects   relating   to   sustainable   urban   development,   employment   and  
competence.   Projects   must   include   at   least   two   member   cities   and   usually   engage   with   a  
combination   of   residents,   companies   and   research,   development   and   innovation   organisations.  
Learning   from   the   projects   is   fed   back   to   the   wider   collective,   in   order   to   improve   competencies  
across   all   six   cities.   
  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Appendix   2:   User   and   publishers   workshops   summary  
Approach  
This   discovery   phase   involved   three   workshops   in   November   2019   to   explore   the   needs   of  
organisations   and   individuals   that   are   currently,   and   could   potentially,   publish   to   or   use   the  
London   Datastore   to   share   and   access   data.   
 
Two   workshops   were   open   to   the   public:   one   brought   together   a   range   of   data   users   and  
decision   makers   and   the   second   sought   views   from   publishers   and   potential   publishers   to   the  
London   Datastore.   The   third   explored   the   current   use   of   the   London   Datastore   by   data   and  
technology   teams   in   London   borough   councils   and   included   seeking   input   to   the   future   vision.  
 
Each   workshop   broadly   explored   two   main   topics:  
1.Current   or   potential   problems   with   using   the   London   Datastore.  
2.Identifying   what   would   need   to   be   in   place   to   overcome   these   challenges   to   enable  
better   stewardship   and   use   of   data   across   London.  
 
Attendees  
The   two   public   workshops   attracted   26   attendees   from   across   the   public   and   private   sectors,  
including   representatives   from   local   authorities,   not-for-profit   organisations   and   small   and  
medium   sized   businesses.   
 
10   data   and   technology   officers   from   Camden,   Croydon,   Greenwich,   Hackney,   Hounslow,  
Lambeth,   Tower   Hamlet   and   Waltham   Forest   councils   came   together   for   the   final   workshop  
organised   by   the   London   Office   of   Technology   and   Innovation   (LOTI)   in   collaboration   with   the  
Open   Data   Institute.  
 
Representatives   from   the   Datastore   team   at   the   Greater   London   Authority   were   present   at   each  
workshop.   
 
Summary   of   findings  
Users   workshop  
●Improving   the   search   function   and   findability   of   data   published   and   shared   is   key   for  
users,   coupled   with   the   ability   to   signpost   and   link   to   related   data/   functions   within   and  
outside   the   Datastore.  
●There   could   be   a   role   for   the   Datastore   in   defining   the   standards   for   sharing   data   about  
London   to   improve   consistency   and   compatibility.   
●Many   operational   boundaries   for   public   services   (eg   fire   brigade/   police)   extend   outside  
of   the   political   boundaries   of   the   GLA.   Balancing   the   ability   to   signpost,   combine   and  
access   data   on   the   periphery   is   important   for   some   users   and   standardising   the   way  
data   is   provided   could   facilitate   this.  
 
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Publishers   workshop  
●The   majority   of   challenges   stem   from   ways   of   working   and   basic   data   management  
issues   rather   than   the   functionality   of   the   Datastore.  
●There   is   a   clear   demand   for   a   clear   strategic   direction,   standards,   processes   and  
guidelines   to   aid   consistency   in   approach   and   ensure   publishers   have   the   right   skills   and  
knowledge.  
 
LOTI/London   boroughs   workshop  
●The   majority   of   data   published   to   the   Datastore   is   done   so   for   statutory   reasons,   rather  
than   a   desire   to   proactively   share.   
●The   biggest   challenge   is   the   lack   of   shared   skills,   standards   and   processes   across   the  
Boroughs,   rather   than   a   lack   of   technical   platform   to   share   data.   
●There   is   an   opportunity   for   collaboration   in   two   areas:  
○Consistency   -   common   guidance,   skills,   standards   and   approaches.  
○To   address   data   needs   that   are   bigger   than   a   single   borough   -   the   need   for  
aggregation,   common   formats,   common   platforms.  
 
 
Further   information  
A   full   write   up   of   each   workshop   can   be   found   via   the   links   below.  
 
1.User   Workshop  
2.Publisher   Workshop  
3.LOTI   Workshop  
 
  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Appendix   3:   Expert   interview   summary  
Approach   
These   semi-structured   interviews   with   four   key   stakeholders   aimed   to   tap   into   the   existing  
knowledge   of   user   and   publisher   needs   by   exploring   how   their   needs   evolved   over   the   years  
and   how   London   Datastore   should   change   to   address   those   needs.  
 
Interviewees   selected   covered:  
 
●The   public   sector   perspective :   an   interview   with   two   members   of   London   Fire  
Brigade   —   as   they’re   currently   both   publishers   and   users   of   the   London   Datastore.  
●The   private   sector   perspective :   an   interview   with   a   member   of   Thames   Water   —   as  
they   are   currently   user   of   the   London   Datastore;   and   another   interview   with   Citymapper  
—   as   a   user   of   transport   data   from   TFL   data.  
●The   perspective   of   a   similar   data   platform :   an   interview   with   a   member   of   TFL   —  
as   they   host   data   and   share   it   with   the   London   Datastore   and   others.  
Summary   of   findings  
Publisher’s   perspective   
Incentives,   blockers   and   challenges   when   sharing   data   and   expectations   from   portals   such  
London   Datastore   to   meet   their   needs  
Motivations   to   publishing   or   share   data  
1.Engagement   publisher   –   user:    “the   biggest   value   I've   seen   from   publishing   on   the  
Datastore   is   that   people   who   are   using   our   data   often   get   in   touch”.  
2.Collaboration,   bring   knowledge   together   –   “ In   terms   of   sharing   data,   I   think   that's  
just   such   a   crucial   component   in   terms   of   being   able   to   bring   together   intelligence,   not  
just   from   an   organization   but   also   from   other   organizations”.  
3.Contribute   to   quality   information   –    by   being   transparent   and   open,   publishers   are  
contributing   to   great   information,   and   that’s   a   driver   for   them.   
Concerns   when   sharing   data  
1.Security   and   usage   of   data   –    The   most-mentioned   worry   that   holders   of   data   have   is  
around   sharing   in   a   secure   way.   This   concern   comes   with   the   fear   of   data   that   is   shared  
ends   up   being   misused/misrepresented   or   the   consequences   when   the   commercial  
interests   of   a   third   party   are   involved.   As   an   interviewee   noted:   “   What   happens   when  
the   objective   of   a   public   council   authority   and   a   commercial   company   don't   necessarily  
align?   What   happens   to   open   data   strategy?”  
2.Reputation,   trust   –    Interviewees   pointed   out   some   of   the   consequences   of   data  
misuse,   such   as   not   being   perceived   as   a   trustworthy   organisation.  
3.Duplicating   shared   data   –    one   of   the   push   backs   for   publishing   into   the   Datastore  
from   those   that   hold   data   is   their   not   seeing   the   value   that   it   would   bring.   As   an  
interviewee   noted:   “   If   there   was   a   strong   public   need   for   it   [we   would]   probably   share  
[data]”   or   as   another   highlighted:   “We   would   need   to   understand   the   purpose   and   what  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
is   the   need   in   terms   of   sharing   that   information   [...]   when   we   already   have   a   platform  
where   we   are   sharing   that   information”.  
Blockers   and   challenges   when   publishing   to   the   London   Datastore  
1.Format   and   quality   of   data    –    noted   as   being   limited  
2.Limited   metadata   view    –    which   makes   difficult   to   give   more   context   to   the   data  
3.Political   issues   –    as   in   collaboration   being   affected   by   the   political   climate   
4.Risk   of   “clunky”   insights      –    If   the   Datastore   were   to   move   towards   an   insight   platform  
User’s   perspective  
Incentives,   blockers   and   challenges   when   accessing   London   city   data   and   expectations   from  
portals   such   London   Datastore   to   meet   their   needs  
General   user   needs   and   frequent   blockers  
1.Updated   data   -     to   provide   more   context   and   significance   to   the   data   they   want   to   use   
2.Navigate   in   a   meaningful   way   –    to   effectively   find   the   data   they   require   and   decide  
whether   is   the   appropriate   one   for   their   needs  
3.Get   access   to   relevant   data   –       and   know   the   source   that   contains   such   information  
Trends   on   user   needs   and   future   challenges  
1.Users   increasingly   asking   for   more   data     –    as   they   experience   the   value   of   data  
2.Real-time   data     –    to   generate   insights   that   come   from   live   data   and   act   upon   them  
3.Various   user   types   and   evolving   needs    –    when   asking   about   the   trends   of   uses   of  
data,   interviewees   mentioned   different   user   types   that   are   emerging   and   what   their  
needs   and   incentives   to   access   data   about   London   might   be:  
a.Users   learning   data   skills   
b.Users   that   need   to   give   context   to   the   data   available   
c.Users   accessing   data   to   inform   decision   making   
d.User   outside   London   that   want   to   compare   data   with   other   city   areas  
e.User   advocating   for   transparency   and   openness  
  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
Appendix   4:   Survey   analysis   summary  
Approach   
With   the   objective   of   understanding   attitudes   and   needs   from   both   users   and   non-users   of   the  
Datastore,   we   ran   a   survey   for   a   month   with   general   and   filtered   questions   —   some   of   the  
questions   were   only   shown   based   on   earlier   answers.  
 
The   survey   was   circulated   widely   by   the   ODI   and   GLA   teams,   and   promoted   on   the   home   page  
of   the   Datastore   for   several   weeks.   It   got   a   total   of   124   responses   and   covered   questions   in  
relation   to:  
●Behaviours   when   accessing   or   publishing   data  
●Motivation/incentive   to   use   open   city   data   
●Attitudes   and   expectations   towards   open/shared   city   data  
●Demographics  
List   of   survey   questions  
1.How   often   do   you   look   for   data   about   London?  
2.What   are   the   main   reasons   you’d   look   for   information   about   London?  
3.How   do   you   typically   access   information   about   London?  
4.How   likely   are   you   to   look   for   information   about   London   to   answer   questions...  
5.How   relevant   are   these   areas   to   you?   -   either   for   professional   or   personal   reasons.  
6.Is   there   any   other   area   that   we   haven't   mentioned   above?  
7.Have   you   used   data   available   from   the   London   Datastore?  
8.How   useful   has   the   London   Datastore   been   to   you   so   far?  
9.From   your   perspective,   what   would   make   the   London   Datastore   more   useful?  
10.How   easy   is   it   to   access   data   (or   share   data,   if   you   do   so)   through   the   London  
Datastore?  
11.From   your   perspective,   what   would   make   the   London   Datastore   easier   to   use?  
12.Have   you   used   any   other   platform   that   contains   open   city   data?   
-   if   yes,   please   Specify:   which   one   how   have   you   used   it   (accessing   the   data   or  
publishing/   sharing   city   data)   how   does   it   compare   to   the   London   Datastore   -   e.g.   In  
terms   of   quality,   quantity   and/or   updated   data  
13.What   kind   of   application/uses   do   you   foresee   created   with   data   about   London,   and   who  
do   you   think   should   be   creating   that   value?  
14.Do   you   or   your   organisation   hold   (create;   collect;   use/maintain)   any   data   about   London?  
15.What   are   your   main   concerns   when   publishing   data   or   sharing   it   privately?   -   eg.   Sharing  
process,   security,   quality,   format,   usefulness,   privacy/ethics   etc  
16.Have   you   published   or   shared   data   using   the   London   Datastore?   
If   yes,   where   does   Datastore   not   fully   address   these   concerns/your   needs   when  
publishing/sharing   data?   
If   no,   would   you   be   interested   in   using   Datastore   to   publish   or   privately   share   data?  
17.How   much   do   you   trust   the   London   Datastore   to   be   the   platform   through   which   you  
could   provide   and   manage   access   to   such   data?  
18.Why   did   you   choose   that   level   of   trust?  
19.What   is   your   gender?   [*]  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
20.What   is   your   ethnicity?   [*]   
21.What   is   the   highest   degree   or   level   of   school   you   have   completed?   [*]  
22.What   is   your   employment   status?   [*]   
23.What   type   of   organisation   do   you   work   for?  
 
[*]   Questions   on   demographics,   and   the   choices   given   to   survey   participants   were   provided   by  
GLA   for   consistency   with   their   current   practices.  
Summary   of   findings   
Ways   of   making   the   London   Datastore   more   useful   and   easier   to   use  
Those   that   are   current   users   of   the   London   Datastore   rated   it   as   an   average   of   7.8   useful   and  
7.0   easy   to   access   the   data.   These   are   the   themes   that   emerged   when   we   asked   about   ways  
of   improving   its   usefulness   and   usability   and   from   the   answers   to   a   question   asking   for  
comparison   with   other   portals   –   questions   9,   11   and   12   respectively   :  
1.Up   to   date   data  
2.Broader   datasets   and   types   of   data   
3.Metadata   and   different   views   for   insights  
4.Improving   navigation   and   search   function   -    including   expanding   categories   and  
better   description   of   them  
5.Offering   signpost   and   updates   indicators  
6.Offering   different   formats    –   and   allowing   interactive   visualisation   and   charts,   but   also  
better   integration   between   data   and   analytical   outputs  
Concerns   and   blockers   for   data   holders  
This   group   includes   both   current   publishers   of   data   in   the   London   Datastore   and   those   that  
hold   city   data,   but   not   necessary   shares   it.   We   asked   them   an   open   question   of   concerns  
when   sharing   data   in   general   –question   15–   and   another   question   where   they   ranked   how   do  
they   trust   the   LDS   to   be   the   platform   where   they   share   the   data   they   hold   –   question   17.    These  
are   the   themes   that   emerged:  
Concerns   when   sharing   data  
1.Quality    –   also   reference   to   formats,   accuracy   and   consistency   of   data  
2.Usefulness    –   a   worry   about   whether   the   data   they’d   share   is   useful   enough  
3.Privacy/ethics   and   security  
4.Usage    –   including   concerns   on   misinterpretation   and/or   misuse  
Blockers   when   publishing   on   the   London   Datastore  
Although   a   great   number   of   stewards   of   city   data   trust   the   London   Datastore   to   publish   the  
data   they   hold,   there   were   some   reasons   why   others   do   not   fully   trust   it:  
 
1.Lack   of   engagement    –   and   not   fully   understanding   the   London   Datastore   aims   and  
plans  
2.Trust    –   The   London   Datastore   needs   to   prove   that   it   is   trustworthy   by   defining   their  
values   or   the   way   data   is   managed   (governance,   curation,   type   of   data   they   would  
make   available,   etc)  
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 

 
3.Unclear   curation   process    –   it’s   being   perceived   as   not   precise   enough   
 
Comparison   between   publishers,   users   and   non-users   of   the   London  
Datastore  
 
 
NON-   USERS  USERS  DATA   HOLDERS  
Frequency   in   looking   for  
information   about   London  
2-3   times   per   year  
(26.1%)  
 
Once   a   month   (26.1%)  
Weekly   (46.5%)  
 
Daily   (18.6%)  
Weekly   (36.6%)  
 
Daily   (24.4%)  
Reasons   to   look   for  
information   about   London  
As   part   of   my   job   (60.9%)  
 
 
Likely   to   answer  
questions  
about   subset   of   London  
(47.8%)  
As   part   of   my   job   (76.7%)  
 
 
Highly   likely   to   answer  
questions  
about   subset   of   London  
(58.1%)  
As   part   of   my   job  
(80.5%)  
 
Highly   likely   to   answer  
questions   about   London  
as   a   whole   (48.8%)   and  
as   a   subset   (48.8%)  
Preferred   way   of  
accessing    data  
Ready-made   insights  
(59.1%)  
 
Downloading   data   (50%)  
Downloading   data  
(88.4%)  
 
Ready-made   insights  
(48.8%)  
Downloading   data  
(82.5%)  
 
Ready-made   insights  
(50%)  
 
Full   survey   report  
The   complete   survey   report   -   including   graphs   and   anonymised   answers,   can   be   found   here:   
2019   London   Datastore   Survey   -   Summary   of   all   responses  
 
 
 
The   Open   Data   Institute ,    3 
rd  
  Floor,   65   Clifton   Street,   London   EC2A   4JE,   UK    |     http://www.theodi.org    
 