



Contents
About this project2
Better data for better government3
Quantity is not always quality4
How better data in government can support better data across the economy5
What we found
7
The UK government data ecosystem through an ODI lens8
Infrastructure8
Capability12
Innovation15
Equity18
Ethics21
Engagement24
Mapping the future27
1

About this project
In August 2021, at the Open Data Institute (ODI), welaunched a projectto
crowdsource data-related organisations and initiatives inside the UK government,
as part of our work in support ofthe National DataStrategy. Contributorsadded
organisations and initiatives to an open documentand provided a series of
comments, critiques and questions. The ODI published a series of blogposts,
looking at the exercise through the lens of the six themes inour manifesto:
infrastructure,capability,innovation,equity,ethicsandengagement. We also held
a discussion as part ofDataConnect21, and the projecthasa theme song, of
sorts.
The lead author is Gavin Freeguard (Special Adviser) and the wider project team
included Dr Jeni Tennison (Vice President and Chief Strategy Adviser), Dr Mahlet
“Milly” Zimeta (Head of Public Policy), Lisa Allen (Head of Consultancy for Data
Programmes, and Julie King (Delivery Manager).
Mapping data in the UK government
‘Mapping data in the UK government’ explores someof the ways that
the UK government is transforming its use of data can unlock the value
of data across the wider economy
2

Better data for better
government
On 27 October 2021, the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer will set out the
government’s spending plans in the Autumn Budget and Spending Review 2021.
The former will outline the state of the economy and proposed changes to
taxation; the latter is expected to set the spending for government departments
for the next three financial years, after a few years of unusual one-year Spending
Review settlements because of the disruption of Brexit and the Covid-19
pandemic.
The Treasury has taken more of an interest in data in its recent fiscal events. In
March 2020, there was investment in better data sharing across government
departments as part of theBudget 2020. The2020 SpendingReviewbrought
several digital- and data-related projects as part of theShared Outcomes Fund‘to
fund pilot projects to test innovative ways of working across the public sector’,
and the most recent iteration is understood to have an even stronger focus on
data-related projects. This year’s Budget and Spending Review come with work
on theNational Data Strategyand a host of otherinitiatives (theNational AI
Strategy,Ten Tech Prioritiesand the forthcomingNational Digital Strategy) already
underway.
But if the UK government wants to maximise the impact of its investments in data,
and ensure that such investments can support its wider priorities (including
‘levelling up’, ‘building back better’, net zero, and making ‘Global Britain’ a key hub
for digital and data), it needs to understand what data-related work is currently
underway and which parts of the government are responsible for what.
The government risks unnecessary duplication between different data projects it
has invested in, inside and outside of government. While tailored approaches in
different teams can lead to benefits, there are also risks of different parts of
government duplicating work or implementing initiatives without learning from the
experiences of others.
3

In addition to aligning good practice across government organisations, the
government will need to ensure it also aligns with other sectors because of key
private sector and third sector roles and relationships involved in delivering public
services and ensuring data works for the wider economy and society. Given the
government’s global data and digital ambitions inthe ‘Integrated Review of
Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy’and elsewhere, such an
alignment could give the UK a comparative international advantage and ensure its
place in conversations about global standards and best practice. And the possible
magnitude of forthcoming reforms to the UK’s data protection regime,currently
out for consultation, means it is particularly importantfor the government to
understand its own data landscape.
Quantity is not always quality
In recent years, the rapid development of new technologies and techniques, the
increasing interest in data, the proliferation of data initiatives across the public
sector, and the transfer of policy responsibilities for data between different
government bodies have all led to confusion – inside and outside government –
about who is responsible for what and what work is underway (let alone how
successful such projects are proving to be). TheNationalAudit Office has
highlighted the challenges of using data across governmentthat existed even
before the pandemic; the House of Commons Public Administration and
Constitutional Affairs Select Committee is among those bodies to havehighlighted
the particular problems during the pandemic, includingthe difficulty in
understanding who is accountable and responsible for data in government.
Our project to map the data-related organisations and initiatives in government is
designed to give everyone – inside and outside government – a better
understanding of the different responsibilities held by different government
organisations, and the different projects underway. Although the government itself
should be maintaining similar lists and maps, we believe that an initiative like this
from the ODI may be able to convene information from - and bridge across
different sectors - in a way that the government by itself can’t.
The continuing proliferation of data organisations and initiatives in government, the
possible reforms to data protection, and the government’s own ambitions and its
intention to plan for the next few years makes such understanding of the data
landscape particularly urgent in light of this Spending Review.
4

How better data in government can support
better data across the economy
In September 2020, the UK government published the draft frameworkNational
Data Strategy (NDS)for public consultation,updatingit in May 2021in response to
the views and evidence received. The National Data Strategy is built around five
missions.
Mission 3 of the National Data Strategyis concernedwith ‘Transforming
government’s use of data to drive efficiency and improve public services’. It notes
the ‘massive untapped potential in the way the government uses data’ and the
‘duty’ to maintain the ‘high watermark’ of data use during the pandemic, when the
public sector was able to share information and solve problems quickly. The
benefits of our mapping exercise to achieving Mission 3 are obvious: the
government has a duty to get its own use of data right, to improve how it makes
policies, delivers services and otherwise effectively and efficiently runs its
operations; understanding who is responsible for what and what can be learned
from whom allows this to happen.
Achieving Mission 3 of the National Data Strategy is a public good in itself. But it is
also essential to, and cannot be separated from, achieving other missions of the
National Data Strategy, including Mission 1 - ‘Unlocking the value of data across
the economy - in the following ways:
●Publishing:The government is a major publisher ofopen data, which can
be used by businesses and others for economic (and social) growth
●Leading:The government has a major influence on whatothers do
through setting expectations and sending signals - it can inspire others
and lead by example
●Collaborating:The government’s own ambitions arelikely to require
support from private (and voluntary) sector partners, providing them with
opportunities which could lead to wider economic benefit
●Supporting:The government can produce resources ofwider interest and
benefit, such as toolkits and research, which other actors in the data
economy can learn from
●Stewarding:The government is a major steward of datathat can be
valuable to data economies and data flows
Making information – such as that in our mapping exercise – more widely
available and understanding which data-related organisations and initiatives exist
within the UK public sector should help encourage collaboration, learning and
implementation across sectors, and lead to more of the value of data being
unlocked across the economy.
5

What we found
A template for getting this right isthe ODI’s manifesto,which identifies six key
areas essential to trustworthy and trusted data ecosystems:infrastructure,
capability,innovation,equity,ethicsandengagement.We propose this model
should be at the heart of the National Data Strategy, and therefore also the UK’s
cross-sector data ecosystems – which includes the government. As the next
section of this report shows, there is work underway in all of these areas within the
government, but some are more developed than others: for example, while there
are longstanding initiatives and institutions with clear responsibilities in some
areas (such as infrastructure or ethics), this is not the case in others (such as
equity and engagement).
Every organisation is a data organisation - but some play a
greater role than others
Our crowdsourced document –Mapping: data in the UKgovernmentl – shows
that there are well over 100 different bodies with significant responsibility for, or a
strong focus on, data. This includes:
●
more than 65 departments (ministerial and non-ministerial), units and other
public bodies
●more than 12 cross-government professions and functions, and
●more than 30 advisory boards, networks and communities.
This is likely to be an underestimate for several reasons. First, in 2021, every
organisation is a data organisation. Some contributors to our crowdsourced
document wondered where to draw the line, for example between organisations
with wider responsibilities and any organisation with a data controller. Any public
sector body should be thinking about how it uses data and its role in different data
ecosystems, and to fully map data initiatives across the government would (or
should) require mapping every government organisation. Nonetheless, our
exercise has tried to concentrate on those organisations with cross-government
responsibilities or with a particular influence on particular sectors and bring some
coherence to the most important and influential organisations; if everyone is
responsible, nobody is responsible. Highlighting the major players is therefore
crucial, and these include:
●
TheCabinet Officeand its various units and relatedbodies
●TheUK Statistics Authority (UKSA)and its associatedorganisations
(including theOffice for National Statistics (ONS)andOffice for
Statistics Regulation (OSR)), for whom ministerialresponsibility
ultimately resides in the Cabinet Office
●TheDepartment for Digital, Media, Culture and Sport(DCMS)and its
public bodies
●TheDepartment for Business, Energy and IndustrialStrategy (BEIS)
and its public bodies (including the research councils)
6

●
TheNational Health Service (NHS)and other parts of the health system.
The Treasury is, as per the Budget and Spending Review and its associated power
at the centre of government, also vital.
Gaps and blurred lines in the public sector
A second reason for our figures being an underestimate is particular gaps in our
knowledge – for example, in the devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland and in English local government.
A third is the sometimes blurred line between what should count as ‘government’
and the public sector and what shouldn’t: there are several government
companies, research council investments, even a limited liability partnership
between a government company and the Local Government Association
(GeoPlace LLP) and a charity (HDR UK) on our list, but there are likely to be other
organisations with similar structures and claims to inclusion that we have missed.
A final reason is that we may simply have missed organisations, particularly more
informal networks and communities across government that are particularly
important for convening across organisations and sharing knowledge and
experiences. In some cases, important bodies lack any sort of public presence on
GOV.UK – the Government Digital, Data and Technology Steering Group has been
mentioned to us but has no such presence, while the data focus of the latest
Shared Outcomes Fund round is not on the record anywhere obvious. Some
entries have been partly based on job adverts or obscure minutes in lieu of more
complete information. This lack of transparency obviously makes it more difficult
to fully understand the government data landscape.
In other cases, we might be including some bodies which have long since ceased
to operate: the Ministerial Group on Government Digital Technology is mentioned
in a 2015 press releasebut not since, and theDataSteering Grouphas a
membership list which is very out of date. Both are still cited onthe ‘governance’
pagefor the Government Digital Service.
Ourcrowdsourced documentis, despite its length (morethan 100 pages),
inevitably a snapshot and not definitive. Nonetheless, we hope it proves useful –
especially with the forthcoming Spending Review and in the midst of various
data-related initiatives. We are extremely grateful to those who have filled in the
gaps in our knowledge and added further information on the organisations and
initiatives related to data.
7

The UK government
data ecosystem
through an ODI lens
As part of our crowdsourcing exercise, we looked at the organisations and
initiatives through the prism of the six points ofthe ODI manifestofor open and
trustworthy data ecosystems.
Infrastructure
What we mean
Sectors and societies must invest in and protect the data infrastructure they rely
on. Open data is the foundation of this emerging vital infrastructure.
When many people think about infrastructure, they think about utilities like
electricity and water supplies, or transport infrastructure like railway lines and
roads. Data should be seen as important as these energy and transport networks,
given how it enables more effective and efficient government and public services,
and economic and social growth.
Data infrastructurecan be thought of as:
●data assets (like datasets, identifiers and registers)
●the standards and technologies that allow those assets to be curated
and accessed
●the guidance and policies that inform the use and management of
those assets
●the organisations that govern the infrastructure
●the communities that contribute, maintain or are impacted by it.
Data infrastructure should be as open as possible for us to get the most value
from it – in particular, key datasets that are stewarded by the public sector and
can be seen as national public data infrastructure.
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Leading:The government needs to get its own datainfrastructure in order
to know what data it holds and provide the right infrastructure for other
actors across the economy and society to unlock value
8

●
Leading:The government treating data as infrastructure should push
others to do so too
●Leading and publishing:In building the right foundationsinside
government, the government can provide examples, resources and skills
for others to benefit from – as well as behaviour for others to model.
9

UK government strengths and weaknesses
Improving data infrastructure has become more of a focus for the government in
recent years. One of the ‘pillars’ of the National Data Strategy is‘data
foundations’, which covers some infrastructure issuessuch as standards,
consistency and quality. The recent reforms to data in government have started to
translate this strategic interest into practical activity, with theData Standards
Authority(DSA), part of the newCentral Digital andData Office(CDDO), ‘lead[ing]
the cross-government conversation around data standards’, including how to
develop and enforce them. The CDDO is responsible for setting and maintaining
other standards across government, including open standards, for which theOpen
Standards Boardis accountable and which the openstandards communityhelps
select.
Other parts of the Cabinet Office have some responsibility for
data infrastructure, including:
●
theGovernment Digital Service(‘creating the cross-governmentreference
architecture and identifying, enabling and standardising the data registers
across government most critical to service delivery’ and running
data.gov.uk)
●the newInformation and Data Exchange(INDEX, supportingthe better of
sharing of information across government)
●Government Business Services(for corporate informationsuch as finance
and HR data)
●theGeospatial Commission(for oversight of locationdata, which is key
foundational data for the economy and society).
TheUK Statistics Authorityis responsible fortheUK’s respected official statistics
infrastructure.UK Research and Innovation, and researchcouncil-funded projects
anddata institutionssuch asHealth Data ResearchUK (HDR UK),Our Future
HealthandAdministrative Data Research UK (ADR UK)are responsible for social
science and research data infrastructure.
There are bodies responsible for securing our data infrastructure, ranging from the
Office for National Statisics’s Secure Research Servicewhich allows safe and
secure access to research data, to theNational CyberSecurity Centrewhich
provides support and guidance for keeping data safe across government. The
devolved administrations have their own bodies (theScottish Government’s Digital
Directorate‘provid[es] a foundation for the digitaldelivery of public services’, the
Welsh Government’sCentre for Digital Public Servicesprovides standards,
guidance, direction and training).
In particular sectors, theDepartment of Health andSocial Care,NHS Digitaland
NHSXare responsible for health data infrastructure;the Department for Transport
for transport data infrastructure; the Department for Education for educational
data infrastructure and so on.
10

The Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government is responsible for
both data infrastructure about housing and that stewarded by local authorities,
and is particularly notable for its focus on‘fixingthe plumbing’.
There has also been more direct government interest and involvement in unlocking
the value of dataaboutinfrastructure: the NationalInfrastructure Commission’s
report on‘Data for the public good’found that improvedsharing of data about the
UK’s infrastructure could lead to lower bills for consumers, a reduced impact on
the environment and improved transport, while theNational Digital Twininvolves a
focus on capturing, using and sharing data about infrastructure effectively, to
‘improve how infrastructure is built, managed, operated and eventually
decommissioned’.
For all the strengths of these initiatives, there is a potential weakness. The National
Audit Office’s report onthe challenges in using dataacross governmenthighlights
‘coherent infrastructure’ as one of the key conditions for success, and cautions
that a lack of strategic leadership has undermined the effectiveness of previous
initiatives.Government attemptsto get a grip ondata infrastructure are not new,
from‘e-government: A strategic framework for publicservices in the Information
Age’(2000) which said departments would implementcommon standards to allow
interoperability, to theNational Information Infrastructure(2010–15) which sought
to ‘contain the data held by government which is likely to have the broadest and
most significant economic and social impact’. The2017 Government
Transformation Strategypledged to build ‘a nationaldata infrastructure ofregisters
(authoritative lists that are held once across government)’ by 2020; the
Government Digital Service’s work on registerswrappedupunsuccessfully in
2021. Some of the
new DSA, CDDO and Government Digital Service initiatives sound a lot like some
of these earlier attempts. Has the government learned the right lessons from
previous failures?
Examples from other sectors and other countries
Europe’s Gaia-X projectbrings together business,science and politics to develop
‘an open, transparent digital ecosystem, where data and services can be made
available, collated and shared in an environment of trust’.
France’s view of data as essential infrastructureincludes efforts to build a public
data service and become a digital republic.
Further resources from the ODI
●
Data infrastructure
●
Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data
●
Infrastructure for common challenges
●
State of Open Data: Data infrastructure
●
Understanding the common technical infrastructure of shared and open
data
●
R&D: Data infrastructure for common challenges
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: consultation response
11

●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: data as infrastructure, data for
infrastructure
Capability
What we mean
Everyone must have the opportunity to understand how data can be and is being
used. We need data literacy for all, data science skills, and experience using data
to help solve problems.
We need people with the skills to get the most out of data – to build the tools, to
write the code, to manipulate and analyse it. But we also need people to think
critically about the use of data in different contexts – to compare and contrast how
data is presented, evaluate bias in the way data is collected, consider the limits
and constraints of data and understand its impact on society. In other words,
data literacy.
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Leading:We need government plans for improving dataskills (including
data literacy) to build capability across sectors
●Leading and supporting:The government building itsown capability
provides examples, materials and role models to follow
●Collaborating:Government work will also develop expertswho can move
to other sectors; career paths which may include a stint in government;
and opportunities for those in the private sector to sell their skills and
services into government
UK government strengths and weaknesses
‘Skills’ is one of the pillars of the National DataStrategy. The government has
longstanding expertise in developing skills around statistics and analysis – for
example, through the work of theGovernment StatisticalService. More recently,
attempts to build the government’s data capability have focused more on the use
of data in digital services: the creation of theGovernmentDigital Servicein 2011
and the subsequent creation of digital teams in many departments helped bring
data professionals into the public sector; and the 2017Government
Transformation Strategyalso promised to embed digitalskills across government.
Recent attempts to improve the capability of the civil service have focused on
strengthening cross-cuttingprofessionsandfunctions,each of which cover skills,
expertise and activities common to many government organisations (including
procurement, policy, finance and HR, as well as digital and data). Some of those
particularly focused on data are relatively mature, including theDigital, Data and
Technology Profession, led by the Central Digitaland Data Office and its work
including developing capability frameworks and career paths for different
data-related roles, and offering training; and theGovernment Analysis Function,
led by the National Statistician, which runs events likeGovernment Analysis
12

Monthand has alearning curriculumandcareer frameworkfor civil servants
working in the government’s various analytical professions. There are other
initiatives for data specialists to develop their skills, such as accelerator
programmes led by theGovernment Data Science Partnership.And there aremore
informal cross-government communities and networks– on everything fromdata
architecturetoAPIs and data exchangeto civil servantsworking onunderstanding
public attitudes to data.
In our response to the National Data Strategy, wenoted the focus on relatively
advanced data skills in central and local government, and called for more attention to
be paid to building comparable capabilities in businesses and civil society.
We also called for a strong foundation of core data literacy across all of society
(and for other professionals in government, such aspolicymakers). There are
some new schemes reaching beyond these specialists: Number 10 hosts
innovation fellowshipsto bring people from business,academia and civil society into
government, and 10DS runsdata masterclasses for seniorleaderswhile
theGovernment Data Quality Hubhas launched an‘introductionto data quality’
course.
Various government strategy documents (such as the now supersededIndustrial
Strategyand the more recentPlan for Growth) mentionthe need to invest in the
skills of the future, including data and artificial intelligence, across the economy
and society. The National Data Strategy mentions several organisations with
responsibility for raising digital and data skills, including theData Skills Taskforce,
The Alan Turing Institute, theNational InnovationCentre for Data, theAI Council,
theUK Cyber Security Council,The Data Laband theODI. DCMS published a
report onQuantifying the UK Data Skill Gapback inMay 2021 and recently
launched anOnline Media Literacy Strategy. Whilethere is much promise in all
this, there was a 2013strategy for data capabilitywhich largely sank without trace.
Examples from other sectors and other countries
In the UK charity sector,DataKind UKhelps ‘socialchange organisations use data
science’ by connecting charities with data scientists, while theCatalystnetwork
‘help[s] UK civil society grow in digital skills and confidence’ (their recent projects
includeThe Data Collective).
Ben Goldacre – currently undertaking a review into the use of health data for the
government – has written (with others) abouthow tobuild data analysis capability
in the NHS.
An international group of academics and experts have come together to develop
skills to support the next generation of public servants, throughTeaching Public
Service in the Digital Age.
13

Further resources from the ODI
●
Data 2020: Skills, engagement and data literacy
●
Data literacy: what is it and how do we address it at the ODI?
●
Data Skills Framework
●
ODI learning courses
●
Skills and literacy
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: skills that count
●
We join forces with the IoD to help upskill a generation of company
directors in data governance
14

Innovation
What we mean
Data must inspire and fuel innovation. It can enable businesses, startups,
governments, individuals and communities to create products and services,
fuelling economic growth and productivity.
Opening and sharing data outside an organisation means that a wider range of
organisations have the opportunity to innovate with data or participate in data
innovation, rather than just the larger organisation which already holds a
significant amount of data. Greater access to data is necessary for innovation, but
it is not sufficient on its own: practical support (including incubators, challenge
funds and competitions, capital investment, open source tools and
innovation-friendly policy changes) is needed to create incentives, incentivise
risk-taking, and overcome barriers to participation from diverse backgrounds.
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Stewarding and publishing:As a major national stewardof data, the
extent to which government innovates with data shapes the level of
innovation possible in the wider economy, including the data it makes
open or otherwise available to businesses, civil society organisations and
others to build new products and services, and its support for the creation
of ecosystems where data is more widely shared.
●Leading and supporting:The government’s own innovationin developing
policy and delivering services provides a signal and an example to others,
and potentially useful resources
●Collaborating:Provides opportunities for suppliersto work together on
innovative projects
UK government strengths and weaknesses
The government has thought more about itself as an innovator in recent years, as
shown by the 2018’Technology innovation in governmentsurvey’, which focused
on the existing landscape of emerging technology use in government (including
‘data driven concepts’ and technologies like artificial intelligence and the internet
of things), and the subsequentGovernment TechnologyInnovation Strategy,
which set out how government should use such technologies to improve public
services.
TheFuture Policy Networkbrings together variousteams from across government
who bring innovation into policymaking (and includesAnalysis and Insight, a
Cabinet Office unit, tasked with a watching brief on public sector innovation
globally). TheCDEIpublishes much of its researchand advice to the government
on how to maximise the benefits of new technology in ethical ways.
15

The government has been at the forefront of innovation in particular areas,
including its work onSmart Data(a new cross-governmentsmart data working
groupaims to support initiatives across differentsectors), while theDeclaration on
Government ReformandMackintosh Reportare just thelatest efforts to make
more data available, the latter also thinking seriously about how to value
knowledge assets (work being continued by the new Government Office for
Technology Transfer).
It has also made funding available for public sector innovation in recent years,
including the Treasury’s Shared Outcomes Fund ‘toaddress cross-cutting issues
in a way that improves outcomes and ensures value for money’, which included a
focus on innovation with data, andthe Regulators’Pioneer Fundfrom BEIS.
There are also parts of government supporting innovation in the wider economy,
such as:
●
theOffice for Artificial Intelligence (AI), taskedwith helping to drive the
‘responsible and innovative’ uptake of AI technologies in the UK
●theDigital Markets Unit, part of the Competitionand Markets Authority,
which aims to promote competition and innovation in digital markets while
protecting the consumer
●theGeospatial Commission, one of whose roles is tofuel innovation in the
use of geospatial data
●Innovate UK, the ‘UK’s innovation agency’ and partofUK Research and
Innovation, which supports businesses ‘to developand realise the
potential of new ideas’ and has AI and the data economy as apriority area
in its delivery plan.
Inour response to the National Data Strategy consultation,we recommended that
the government should pay more attention to civil society as data innovators and
noted that publication of more open and shared data would allow innovation from
a wider range of innovators (as well as the need to develop the right skills for
people from all backgrounds.
Previous government reports on opening up data, such as thePower of
Informationreview (2007) and taskforce report (2009),and ‘Shakespeare review of
public sector information’(2013), may have emphasisedthe innovation possible
based only on public sector information being made more widely available at the
expense of thinking about data from different sectors being brought together.
16

Examples from other sectors and other countries
The European Commission has innovation as one of the pillars ofthe European
Data Strategy, and says ‘businesses will have moredata available to innovate as a
result’ of the strategy.
TheOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’sObservatory of
Public Sector Innovationsurveys the landscape andaims to ‘turn the new into the
normal and provide trusted advice’.
Further resources from the ODI
●
Data innovation for the UK: research and development
●
Innovation: ODI topic
●
R&D: Scaling data innovation
●
Seven reasons why businesses should be sharing data
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: innovation with impact
●
Using data in the public sector
17

Equity
What we mean
Everyone must benefit fairly from data. Access to data and information promotes
fair competition and informed markets, and empowers people as consumers,
creators and citizens.
One aspect of equity is around diversity and inclusion. The importance of data to
decision making, data-driven innovation through technologies like artificial
intelligence, and data’s role as important nationalinfrastructuremeans it is vital
that data is as representative as possible. Some groups can be under-represented
in data and others over-represented, which may lead to discrimination and
reinforce existing inequalities.
Another aspect is around fair competition and informed markets, and empowering
consumers. Regulation and legislation like the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) guarantees people’s rights as citizens and consumers, protects their
privacy and gives them more control over rights about data about themselves. The
right to data portabilityin GDPR – which allows individualsto obtain and reuse
personal information – enables consumers to move between different services,
which may be good for competition and allow the consumer to get a better deal.
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Publishing and leading:Government collecting andpublishing data that
shines a light on inequalities within and beyond its own operations
●Leading and supporting:Improving the data the governmentholds and
uses on social diversity characteristics
●Leading:More diverse social representation in governmentdata efforts
●Supporting:Making available research and resourcesthat can be used by
others to support their own efforts
●Collaborating:Projects that improve the social diversityof the wider data
science field
●Collaborating:Coordinating data projects to supportconsumers for fairer
market competition
UK government strengths and weaknesses
At present, data equity is perhaps under-served by initiatives and organisations
compared to the other ODI manifesto points. The2020A Level algorithm fiascois
a prominent example of why it matters (with bias in the use of data and algorithms
discriminating against certain schools and students) and why the government
needs to take these issues more seriously. Nonetheless, there are some strengths
in the government’s current approach, and new initiatives are getting underway.
On the diversity and inclusion side of equity, this includesEquality Hub, which
works with the Cabinet Office, the Government Equalities Office, the Social
Mobility Commission, Race Disparity Unit and Disability Unit to use data to
18

understand inequity and inequalities across society. Equality Hub’sequalities data
auditbuilds onthe Race Disparity Auditand includesdata on geographical
inequalities – part of the government’s ‘levelling up’ agenda – and the intersection
between different characteristics, such as ethnicity, gender, disability status and
socio-economic background. It is also responsible forthe Gender Pay Gap
Service: organisations with more than 250 employeesare required to publish
gender pay gap data, to help understand and illustrate the problem.
The UK Statistics Authority’sInclusive Data Taskforcehas recently publishedits
reporton how to improve the data held on some ofthese characteristics (and
goes much further thatthe (much-criticised) Reportof the Sewell Commission on
Race and Ethnic Disparitieswhich included a recommendationto ‘use data in a
responsible and informed way’). The The Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation’s
(CDEI’s) review of howalgorithmic biasmight affectsignificant decisions about
individuals looked at financial services and recruitment as well as the public
sector, and its recommendations and resources will be of use beyond
government. The National Data Strategy Forum – designed to help ‘operationalise’
the strategy and keep stakeholders involved – says it will ‘prioritise diversity of
representation, bringing together multidisciplinaryexpertise and fresh
perspectives from up and down the country’.
On the markets and competition side, BEIS’s work onSmart Data– ‘putting
consumers in control of their data and enabling innovation’ – stands out. It was
referenced multiple times in the National Data Strategy, including the creation ofa
cross-government Smart Data working groupto supportinitiatives and benefit
consumers across different sectors. The newDigitalMarkets Unitis tasked with
approaching competition and harms in digital markets. TheInformation
Commissioner’s Officeobviously has an important role,given its responsibility for
enforcing legislation like GDPR.
Government actions in other areas will have a significant bearing on data equity.
For example, government funding for degree conversion courses to data science
and AI, ‘including £10m for up to 1,000 scholarships for people from diverse
backgrounds’, should diversify data science intakes and lead to greater diversity in
the collection, use and application of data in the future.
Examples from other sectors and other countries
The US is establishing an‘equitable data workinggroup’, noting that a lack of
disaggregated data on protected characteristics ‘has cascading effects and
impedes efforts to measure and advance equity’.
The European Commission has anequality data handbookand other
initiatives underway.
There is also increasing action around the inequities created by tech monopolies
on both sides of the Atlantic, with Europe’sDigitalMarkets Actand the US
government’s appointment of Lina Khan as Federal Trade Commission chair
prompting complaintsfrom Facebook and Amazon.
19

Further resources from the ODI
●
About Data About Us
●
Data enabled cities
●
The dividing line: how we represent race in data
●
Inclusive data: perspectives from a roundtable discussion
●
Monitoring Equality in Digital Public Services (report)
●
One year of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion at the ODI
●
Objective data? Reflections on the Commission for Race and Ethnic
Disparities report
●
The ODI responds to the UK Statistics Authority Inclusive Data
Consultation
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: equity, fairness and rights
●
The weird and the wonderful: reflections on the Commission for Race and
Ethnic Disparities report
20

Ethics
What we mean
People and organisations must use data ethically. The choices made about
what data is collected and how it is used should not be unjust, discriminatory
or deceptive.
Ethics is about using data well and avoiding harmful impacts. This means
maximising the benefits of data use by people, organisations, and governments,
as well as thinking through theconsequences of howdata use might harm people,
communities and infrastructure (for example, public goods such as the
environment).
Demonstrating that ethical processes are embedded in how data is collected,
analysed and used can help build confidence: astheNational Data Strategy
outlines, any ‘transformation’ in government’s useof data ‘will only be possible
and sustainable if it is developed within a robust ethical framework of
transparency, safeguards and assurance which builds and maintains public trust
in the government’s use of data’.
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Leading:Leading by example (including perhaps beingseen to go beyond
checklist exercises)
●Supporting:Providing resources and tools that canbe used more widely
outside government (such as the Data Ethics Framework and published
research)
●Collaborating:Providing all the actors and agentsin the economy with
confidence about data flows through data assurance
●Leading and collaborating:Giving people and organisationsconfidence
in the services it provides and strengthening their participation in the
economy and society
●Leading and collaborating:Supporting an environmentwhere
businesses using data ethically can thrive through projecting ethical
values globally
UK government strengths and weaknesses
‘Ethics and public trust’ is one of the five key areas of Mission 3 in the National
Data Strategy: ‘transforming government’s use of data to drive efficiency and
improve public services’. Both the National Data Strategy and theIntegrated
Reviewdiscuss shaping an open international order(including ethical values),
which aims to support UK businesses. And the UK has attempted to establish and
‘retain a global leadership position’in the ethicaland accountable use of data and
AI (through establishing CDEI, work on standards and working on national
strategies around data and AI) in recent years. All of this means a proliferation of
ethics-related initiatives across government.
21

One of the most prominent was theData Ethics Framework, ‘a set of principles to
guide the design of appropriate data use in the public sector’, now overseen by
theCDDO. As well as being used to embed ethical practiceacross the public
sector, its principles can be useful to other sectors.
As well as the research and advice provided byCDEI,parts of the UK Statistics
Authority (eg the National Statistician’sData EthicsAdvisory Committeeand the
Centre for Applied Data Ethics) provide ethical adviceto the National Statistician
and the wider research community (their strategy,‘Statistics for the Public Good’,
says ethics will be ever more important); the NHSX AI Lab hasan AI ethics
initiative; and the Geospatial Commission has launcheda project onthe ethics of
location data, which includes public engagement. We’vepreviously argued
reflective and deliberative approaches are better than prescriptive frameworks,
and CDEI has established aPublic Attitudes to Dataand AI networkacross
Whitehall to bring together various public engagement initiatives.
While all of these initiatives are encouraging and show some movement from
theoretical considerations of ethics to more practical ones, there remain questions
about how best to ensure individuals in the public sector, private sector and
elsewhere pay attention to ethical concerns in their work on a practical, daily
basis.
There may also be some work needed in the field of data assurance. Ourdata
assurance worknotes that there may be a need fora responsible body or named
person to assure that data is being used and shared ethically. TheNational Data
Strategy includes an example, not related to ethics,where the government can
play such a role: the Food Standards Agency’s Food Hygiene Ratings Scheme can
help consumers and platforms make more informed decisions. The government’s
ongoing work around digital identity assurance– whereproviders of digital identity
services are assured against a trust framework – is one example of where
government work on ethics may help unlock wider economic value.
Examples from other sectors and other countries
Many civil society organisations and academic institutions have a strong focus on
data ethics. As well as the ODI (for example, ourData Ethics Canvas), examples
include theAda Lovelace Instituteand theOxfordInstitute for Ethics in AIin the
UK, andData & Societyin the US.
There are also private sector initiatives ranging fromtechUK’s Digital Ethics
Working GrouptoMicrosoft’s Responsible AI principles.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development keeps awatching
brief on international initiativesand has producedits ownGood Practice Principles
for Data in the Public Sector.
22

Further resources from the ODI
●
Assurance, trust, confidence – what does it all mean for data?
●
Covid-19: Identifying and managing ethical issues around data
●
Data ethics and privacy
●
Data ethics: how to be more trustworthy with data
●
Expanding the global fight against misinformation with technology
●
The next generation of data ethics tools
●
The ODI Data Ethics Canvas
●
ODI Summit 2020: Algorithmic transparency and the public sector
roundtable
●
Sharing models for Covid-19: guidance and tools
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: doing data ethically
23

Engagement
What we mean
Everyone must be able to take part in making data work for us all. Organisations
and communities should collaborate on how data is used and accessed to help
solve their problems.
The government’s data initiatives will be more likely to succeed if they draw on the
collective perspectives of the public, society and industry – they will highlight
opportunities and challenges that the government itself may not have thought
about, or have experience addressing. Engaging those outside government may
also help build support for reforms and make them more likely to be implemented
successfully.
But the ODI believes that ‘engagement’ goes beyond outreach activities.
Collaborating on how data is used and accessed takes us into the realm of data
governance, which should be interpreted as stewarding data for the best use,
rather than a narrower definition focusing on data protection and compliance.
Organisations that think seriously about their stewardship role and the positive
economic and social outcomes they can achieve can unlock real value from their
data. Inour theory of change, we contrast this positive‘farmland’ vision (where
those who steward data act in ways that lead to the best social and economic
outcomes for everyone) with more negative futures, such as the oilfield (where
organisations decide to hoard data and little value is realised) and the wasteland
(where organisations fear data and we end up with little data to build value upon).
How the government getting data right can unlock the wider value of data
across the economy
●
Collaborating:For ‘engagement’ in the classic sense,engaging those
outside government on government’s plans for data is vital for support,
challenge and ultimately success
●
Leading and supporting:Government engagement canprovide others
outside government with a blueprint on how to engage and build trust
●
Stewarding and collaborating:For ‘engagement’ inthe wider sense,
being a responsible steward of data and collaborating properly with others
allows the best possible use of data across the economy
UK government strengths and weaknesses
There may be more that the government can do in engaging the public in a
conventional sense. And while some government organisations are starting to
think seriously about their role as data institutions and how they collaborate with
others, this is another area where more work can be done.
The National Data Strategy itself has been built around engagement, in a public
dialogue sense: the initial framework strategy was based ona series of
roundtables and other interactions, that strategywas thenput out for consultation,
and DCMS has establisheda forumto support the implementationof the strategy
24

(co-chaired by techUK) and a subgroup, theInternational Data Transfers Expert
Council, to ‘enable the government to deliver on itsmission to champion the
international flow of data’.
There are also many othergovernment advisory boardswith members from
outside government, including theCouncil for Scienceand Technology (CST),
which advises the Prime Minister on science and technology policy issues; the
Digital Economy Council, which aims ‘to harness theexpertise of industry and the
wider tech community’; theAI Council, which providesadvice on the artificial
intelligence ecosystem; theOpen Standards Board,which is ‘accountable for
transparent selection and implementation of open standards’; and thePrivacy and
Consumer Advisory Group, which ‘advises the governmenton how to provide
users with a simple, trusted and secure means of accessing public services’. And
there are othercross-government networks and communitiesto try to ensure
different parts of the public sector engage with one another.
There are fewer initiatives engaging directly with the public. TheNational Data
Guardianis a notable exception, with several of itsoutputs based onpublic
dialogue. The CDEI has set up a cross-governmentPublicAttitudes to Data and AI
(PADAI) networkto try to keep abreast of work onpublic attitudes. And there are
othercross-government networks and communitiestotry to ensure different parts
of the public sector engage with one another.
We also need to think more broadly about ‘engagement’ in terms of data stewards
anddata institutions– and this includes organisationsnot traditionally (or
primarily) seen as data institutions. In government, this might include bodies as
diverse as theCharity Commission(which holds dataon all the UK’s charities), the
Oil and Gas Authority(which has anational repositoryof data on
petroleum-related information),Our Future Health(a health research programme)
and theUK Data Service(‘a ‘one-stop shop’ for researchersto access a wide
range of high-quality social and economic data’). We have previously argued that
the UK government needs to think about how to support and scrutinise these
institutions – especially in support of ambitions such asglobal AI leadership.
Institutions in all sectors need to start thinking about themselves as data
institutions, and there may be a need fornew formsof data institution, such as
data trusts. An ecosystem of such institutions and data stewards may also help
plug any gaps in data that exist through being able to curate and share data from
different sources.
25

Examples from other sectors and other countries
A prominent recent example of public engagement wasOneLondon’s work on the
use of health and care data.
Understanding Patient Dataalso supports public conversationsaround health
data.
The Ada Lovelace Institute hasa repository of publicattitudes workrelating
specifically to Covid-19.
The ODI’s own work ondata institutionsprovides awealth of resources on
thinking about data stewardship.Our collaborationwith the Institute of Directors
focuses on how to support private sector leaders to think more widely about data
governance as part of their digital transformation.
Further resources from the ODI
●
Assurance, trust, confidence – what does it all mean for data?
●
Data About Us: ‘the people’ know and care more than they are given
credit for
●
Data institutions
●
The Data Institutions Register
●
How leaders can develop a data strategy that addresses global challenges
●
The IoD and the Open Data Institute (ODI) join forces to upskill a
generation of company directors in data governance
●
The ODI’s written evidence for APPG on Artificial Intelligence
●
Trustworthy data institutions
●
The UK National Data Strategy 2020: engaging for resilience
●
Why poor data governance could be a director’s undoing (podcast)
26

Mapping the future
Thiscrowdsourcing exercisegives a sense of the differentdata-related
organisations across government, and the data-related initiatives currently
underway. We hope it proves useful to those in government confronting the
Spending Review and Budget.
But the Spending Review is just one of many data-focused initiatives at the centre
of government at the moment. The newDowning StreetDelivery Unit (10DU)and
an Evaluation Task Forceare both designed to usedata to hold departments to
account for their performance on government priorities. The newInformation and
Data Exchange (INDEX)in the Cabinet Office andIntegratedData Service and
Platform at the Office for National Statisticsareboth designed to better share data
and insights across government. TheDeclaration onGovernment Reform, the
Treasury’s ownPlan for Growthand theNational DataStrategyalso make much of
using data to track government progress.
Thisreport, and the full crowdsourcing document,therefore provide a map to help
further exploration for those inside and outside government, as the government
seeks to improve its own use of data – and those of us outside government seek
to learn from it.
27