

 

 
 
Contents 
 
About2 
Executive summary3 
Recommendations5 
Introduction6 
New insights on revenue generation9 
Sources of revenue10 
Mixed revenue models11 
Revenue models across different roles12 
Costs and cost management approaches14 
Key activities in different stages of a data institution’s lifecycle15 
Most expensive resources and activities16 
Resources16 
Activities16 
Ways to manage costs17 
Support from funders and other actors23 
Government and philanthropic funding24 
What are funders interested in?24 
Type of funding provided24 
Funding for different lifecycle stages25 
UK Biobank, funded by Wellcome and the Medical Research Council
25 
Requirements for measuring impact26 
HiLo Maritime Risk Management, initially funded by the Lloyd’s 
Register Foundation27 
Other support27 
Conclusions and recommendations30 
Recommendations for those scoping, designing and running data institutions
30 
Recommendations for those funding and supporting data institutions31 
Next steps33 
Methodology34 
Research questions34 
Desk research35 
Interviews35 
Funder interviews36 
Sampling method36 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
published in September 2020. The lead authors are Diána Szász, Ben Snaith and 
Joe Massey, with research support from Sonia Duarte. Leigh Dodds, Jeni 
Tennison and Jack Hardinges provided additional contributions. To share 
feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact the Sustainable Data 
Access project lead ​Diána Szász​. 
 
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click 
the ‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   2 

 
 
Executive summary 
In spring 2020, the Open Data Institute (ODI) published a report summarising the 
1
results of an initial investigation into the sustainability of data institutions.  
 
Data institutions are organisations whose purpose involves stewarding data –  that 
is, collecting, maintaining and sharing data – on behalf of others, often towards 
public, educational or charitable aims. The sustainability of these organisations is 
vital to ensure that they can continue to deliver on their mission, and drive social, 
economic and environmental impact. But we found that achieving financial 
sustainability is often challenging for data institutions as some of the possible 
revenue models can hinder their goal of increasing access to data.  
 
This report is the result of our continued research into the business models of data 
institutions and the surrounding funding landscape. We have further explored the 
revenue models used by data institutions by looking at a broader set of data 
institutions through our desk research. We then focused on examining the cost 
structures of a small number of data institutions and the approaches they have 
taken to lower costs so that they do not have to generate as much revenue. We 
looked at data institutions that are relatively young as well as others that have 
been operational for a long time. Finally, we explored what drives public and 
philanthropic funders’ decisions to fund data institutions. 
 
We found further validation that a mix of revenue sources, while not always 
feasible or indeed necessary, seems to be common among ‘successful’ data 
institutions. We also found that a mixed revenue model can help distribute the 
costs of running the data institution more equitably among the stakeholders that 
gain value from the data institution’s work. Some revenue streams, such as 
membership and subscription fees, seem to be used only when data institutions 
play particular roles while others, such as grants, appear to be common across 
different roles. Understanding the value of data institutions for key actors in the 
ecosystem that surrounds them – for data contributors, data users, decision 
makers and funders – may help to identify the revenue models available to data 
institutions.  
 
Continuing to draw on the Business Model Canvas developed by Alexander 
Osterwalder, we examined the key activities and key resources that drive data 
institutions’ costs. Staff costs appear to make up the majority of costs for data 
institutions, driven by activities such as technical infrastructure development and 
maintenance; data collection, curation and maintenance; strategy development; 
governance; and community engagement.  
 
The strategies to reduce costs come either from the choice of services used – for 
example, choice of data hosting service – or from the design of the data institution 
and its services. Most strategies to reduce costs come with risks that need to be 
balanced. Some strategies – say, adopting a crowd-sourcing model for data – 
may reduce costs in some areas (for example data collection) but raise it in other 
1
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/article/designing-sustainable-data-institutions-paper/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   3 

 
 
areas (for example in community engagement).  
 
A data institution can make decisions about when it will incur certain costs. It may 
be able to decide when it would like to scale its services and incur related costs, 
or when it would like to develop its own platform if using an existing one is 
suboptimal. Considering these choice points can help to better plan and manage 
specific costs.  
 
Strategies to lower costs do not eliminate the need to identify long-term, 
sustainable revenue and funding models. If data institutions do not have access to 
suitable revenue and funding streams, they cannot fulfil their role of creating and 
maintaining essential infrastructure for increasing access to data for 
decision-makers and for society more broadly.  
 
We have previously seen that grant funding is a common source of income for 
data institutions, especially at the initial stages of their lifecycle. It is likely that 
some data institutions, such as the long-term health research project Biobank, will 
continue to rely on public or philanthropic funding throughout their operation. We 
found that some funders are conscious of the need for ongoing funding and, 
recognising that the data institution delivers value aligned to their philanthropic 
goals, are able to provide long-term funding. 
 
Our research has identified broader forms of support that can help data 
institutions’ growth and sustainability. These can come from actors other than 
funders. Support can come from firms providing specific services such as legal, 
accounting or technology services. It can also come from organisations that aim 
to support data infrastructure either at the system level or focused on specific 
sectors of the economy. The scholarly research and communication space, for 
instance, has given rise to several initiatives aimed at supporting data institutions 
with guidance and resources as well as supporting funders’ decisions through 
research and recommendations on which institutions should be considered for 
funding support in the sector. Other sectors could explore these efforts and see if 
2
there are models to learn from. 
 
We have identified recommendations for data institutions, funders and other 
actors who are interested in supporting the creation and sustainability of data 
institutions. 
 
 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for those scoping, designing and running data institutions 
 
●Be transparent about the full costs involved in running data institutions 
●Understand the consequences of cost management strategies 
●Understand and communicate the value you offer to key actors in your data 
ecosystem  
●Develop and iterate on an evaluation plan to demonstrate impact 
 
2
 Educopia Institute (2019), ‘Why Are So Many Scholarly Communication Infrastructure 
Providers Running a Red Queen’s Race?’, ​https://educopia.org/red-queens-race/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   4 

 
 
Recommendations for those funding or supporting data institutions 
 
●Identify opportunities to align your approach with other funders 
●Support data institutions to grow beyond their core activities 
●Clearly articulate your approach to funding data institutions 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   5 

 
 
Introduction 
Access to data is crucial for enabling innovation. We need data to be stewarded 
– collected, maintained and shared – responsibly to ensure that it’s available to 
those who need it in ways that retain trust. If we don’t act responsibly, then we are 
unlikely to realise the full benefits that data could have, and could expose people 
and communities to harmful impacts, such as  exclusion or profiling. 
At the ODI we are exploring the role of data institutions – organisations whose 
purpose involves stewarding data on behalf of others, often with public, 
educational or charitable aims. The economic and social value of existing data 
3
institutions is evident in examples such as the below.  
●The ​Open Apparel Registry​, an open-source map and database of global 
apparel facilities, helps inform efforts to improve working conditions in 
factories and enables brands to manage their own supply chains more 
effectively.  
●The ​Creative Diversity Network​ stewards and publishes data about the 
diversity efforts of UK broadcasters. 
●The ​UK Biobank​ aims to improve the prevention, diagnosis and treatment 
of serious and life-threatening illnesses. It stewards the biological samples 
and data of 500,000 volunteer participants, and makes the data available 
for research and development. 
●The ​Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)​ promotes a sustainable economy 
by helping companies and cities disclose the environmental impact of 
major corporations. 
We’re also interested in data access initiatives, which we describe as initiatives or 
4
programmes that: 
●have a clear challenge, in the form of a specific social, environmental or 
economic problem that is the focus for collaboration 
●involve multiple stakeholders that are actively working together to solve 
the problem 
●include a strong focus on collecting, using and sharing data as part of 
their work. 
OpenActive, a community-led initiative to help people in England get active, 
5
hosted at the ODI, is an example of a data access initiative. Another is the 
Emergent Alliance, whose aim is to build economic resilience and support 
6
recovery from COVID-19. 
Over time we think that data access initiatives might lead to new data institutions 
being created, or existing institutions will have a strengthened role as stewards of 
3
 The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘What do we mean by data institutions?’, 
https://theodi.org/article/what-do-we-mean-by-data-institutions/  
4
 The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘What do we mean by data access initiatives?’, 
https://theodi.org/article/what-do-we-mean-by-data-access-initiatives/  
5
 Open Active (n.d.), ​https://www.openactive.io/ 
6
 Emergent Alliance (n.d.), ​https://emergentalliance.org/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   6 

 
 
data infrastructure. This will be needed to embed and secure the change 
necessary to solve particular challenges. 
Setting up and running data access initiatives and data institutions can be costly. 
If an organisation wants to ensure it can provide continued stewardship of data, it 
needs to be financially sustainable. 
The costs of data access initiatives that do not take an institutional form may be 
met in various ways. An existing organisation may be paid to run it, as has been 
the case with OpenActive. A group of stakeholders may contribute in-kind and/or 
financial resources as with the Emergent Alliance, a nonprofit community made 
7
up of corporates, individuals, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and 
governments. Its aim is to better inform economic decision making, in particular to 
aid societal recovery post Covid-19.  Often a mix of these funding models might 
be used.  
Setting up a dedicated organisation – a data institution – might arise from the 
need to be able to receive direct funding, as has been the case with Open 
Banking Limited, or the need for the initiative to govern itself as a standalone 
8
entity separate from organisations that may have previously funded or run it. 
Our focus in this report is on the institutional forms of data stewardship – 
organisations which require guaranteed resources over the longterm to fulfil their 
purpose. 
This is challenging. Traditionally, generating revenue has tended to rely on 
charging directly for access to data. However, revenue models that include 
charging for access to data entail restricting access to it, for example through 
licensing conditions on its use or reuse, or through price. This means only 
organisations with sufficient resources can access and use the data.  This in turn 
reduces the economic and social value that data institutions aim to deliver by 
increasing access to data. We have been looking at ways data institutions can 
become financially sustainable without using paid for licences, or otherwise 
restricting access. 
We explored some of the challenges around finding sustainable revenue or 
funding sources in our first report, ​Designing sustainable data institutions, 
9
published in April 2020. We proposed a framework for thinking about the 
sustainability of data institutions that involves three different elements. 
●The ​role​ that the data institution plays in its data ecosystem, which 
directly impacts its options for the type and source of its revenue; and the 
underlying costs that the institution has to cover. 
●The ​stage​ that the data institution is at in its lifecycle, which informs the 
type of revenue it needs and can acquire, and how those revenue sources 
may evolve over time as the institution and its ecosystem mature.  
●The broader ​business model​ of the data institution, that is, the structure 
used to create, deliver, capture and distribute value. This in turn informs 
the choice of revenue model that best aligns with its purpose. 
7
 Emergent Alliance (n.d.), ​https://emergentalliance.org/?page_id=1517  
8
 Open Banking (n.d.), ​https://www.openbanking.org.uk/ 
9
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’, 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1k0tcVStnXb7jpS7P9hhFQ2d3Spu45J5GkVtxpUdXwCg/
edit  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   7 

 
 
The previous report explored the following areas, which are not elaborated on in 
this report. 
●The role of community support and good governance as facets of 
sustainability. 
●Common legal forms of data institutions and how they affect the types of 
revenue sources available. 
●The tensions that arise with some revenue models between the purpose 
of a data institution and its need to generate revenue. 
This report builds on that research and complements it with research on:  
●what costs data institutions need to cover at different stages of their 
lifecycle 
●what strategies can be used to manage them 
●an exploration of what makes public and philanthropic funders interested 
in funding data institutions  
●how funding practices align with data institutions’ needs.  
For more details on how we conducted this research, see the ​Methodology 
section.  
This research and development project is part of the ODI’s broader work on data 
access initiatives and data institutions. This includes our data institutions 
programme that aims to make significant advances in the understanding of data 
10
institutions, and the roles they can play, as well as supporting organisations to 
create new data institutions or to recognise their role as a data institution. The 
ODI’s research and development programme also includes a project that looks at 
mechanisms such as certification to formalise trusted relationships between data 
stewards and data users; and a project that supports sectors to address specific 
11
challenges through data sharing. 
12
This research will inform the next phase of our project, which involves  developing 
practical tools for supporting data institutions at different stages of their lifecycle. 
 
  
10
 Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Project: Data Institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-data-institutions/  
11
 Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Project: Building trusts through audit and certification’, 
https://theodi.org/project/building-trust-through-audit-and-certification/  
12
 Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Project: Data Infrastructure for Common Challenges’, 
https://theodi.org/project/data-infrastructure-for-common-challenges/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   8 

 
 
New insights on revenue 
generation 
In our previous report, ​Designing sustainable data institutions,  we introduced a 
13
framework which considers the role of the data institution in its ecosystem, its 
lifecycle stage and its broader business model, that is, how it creates, delivers and 
captures value.  
In this research we looked at data institutions across the six roles we have found 
they play and identified the revenue models adopted by data institutions that 
14
fulfil these roles.  
Any given data institution may not fall precisely into one of these categories, and 
instead may perform a number of the roles. 
 
 
Role 
 
Examples 
 
 
Revenue sources observed 
Data institutions that create 
and maintain open databases 
that other people and 
organisations can contribute 
to and that anyone can 
access, use and share 
 
Wikimedia Foundation​, 
OpenStreetMap​, ​Musicbrainz​, 
Open Apparel Registry 
Donations, sponsorships, fees or 
donations for commercial use of 
data, donations for speaking at 
conferences, consultancy fees, 
membership fees, grants  
Data institutions that 
aggregate existing open or 
public data and make it 
available for anyone to 
access, use and share  
OpenCorporates​, ​imin​, ​360Giving​, 
OpenOwnership 
Fees for commercial use of data, 
premium data services, grants 
Data institutions that assign 
and maintain identifiers for a 
sector or field 
CrossRef​, ​ORCID​, ​ROR​, other 
registration agencies  
Membership and subscription 
fees, service fees, content (data) 
registration fees, grants and 
donations (in early stages) 
Data institutions that hold 
data on behalf of an 
organisation or person, or 
group of them, and process, 
Data institutions that exist with 
some degree of public mandate: 
HESA​, ​Oil and Gas Authority​, 
Companies House​ and other 
business registers, ​Office for 
Government funding, mandatory 
subscriptions, grants, service 
fees 
 
13
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’ 
https://theodi.org/article/designing-sustainable-data-institutions-paper/  
14
 The Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Data Institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-data-institutions/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   9 

 
 
publish or share it with others 
(such as for research)  
National Statistics​, ​Eurostat​ and 
other statistical agencies, ​Data 
Communications Company  
Data institutions that do not have 
a public mandate: 
UK Biobank​, ​Health Data 
Research Hubs​, ​Creative Diversity 
Network​, ​Land Portal​, ​UK Data 
Service​, ​MEDIN 
Grants, application fees, access 
charges, membership fees  
Data institutions that 
combine or link data from 
different sources, and provide 
insights and other services 
exclusively to those that have 
contributed data  
 
HiLo​, ​Data Trust for Open Access 
Ebook Usage​, ​FarmBench​, ​LG 
Inform 
Subscription and membership 
fees (incubation in early stages). 
If organisations in this category 
are private companies, raising 
investment from the market may 
be a feasible option.  
Data institutions that support 
people and communities to 
steward data themselves for 
particular purposes or causes 
OpenHumans​, ​Health Bank Private foundation grants, 
commercial partnerships, 
academic partnerships, usage 
fees 
Table 1: ​Examples of data institutions and their revenue sources across a range of roles which we 
have found data institutions play. 
Sources of revenue 
In ​Designing sustainable data institutions, we identified a range of revenue 
15
models that data institutions rely on at different stages of their lifecycle. These 
include earned revenue, such as recurring membership and subscription fees, and 
other models such as grants, and financial and in-kind donations. 
Our current research confirmed that organisations can bring in revenue by selling 
added-value services where the data user pays for access to a more reliable 
service than the free public service or API.  
For example, the Metadata Plus service of Crossref, a membership organisation 
16
that assigns and maintains identifiers for research outputs, offers extra guarantees 
and features over the public service. To make such a paid-for service attractive to 
data users, Crossref told us that the most important thing it can do, even though it 
requires significant effort, is to improve the value of the data by enhancing its 
quality and coverage and/or by supplementing or combining it with additional 
data.  
In our research, we found that membership rather than subscription fees might 
offer additional benefits for some data institutions. Crossref is committed to the 
idea of membership. Membership typically encourages a more active involvement 
and is used as a way of ensuring that people contributing data are the ones 
governing access to it. Members may receive a range of benefits as part of their 
15
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’ 
16
 Crossref (n.d.), ‘Fees’, ​https://www.crossref.org/fees/#metadata-plus-subscriber-fees  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   10 

 
 
membership, and also may be expected to contribute in both monetary and 
non-monetary ways, for example with their time, energy and expertise. 
17
Subscriptions tend to be a simpler, transactional exchange of services for a fee.  
Crossref told us that this focus on membership emphasises that the data 
stewardship is a collective endeavour. According to Crossref, it is the best way to 
‘ensure that they do not become an organisation that develops its own agenda’.  
Another long-term strategy that has been used by some data institutions is 
endowments. Endowments are long-term donations of money that can be used by 
nonprofits for a specified purpose. They have been typically used in education, 
but organisations such as Wikimedia are also using them. Building or fundraising 
18
for an endowment can help with an organisation’s long-term sustainability, and 
smaller organisations such as Permanent, a nonprofit organisation whose mission 
is the preservation of the digital legacy of all people, has managed to convert 
donations into an endowment fund. 
19
Mixed revenue models 
In our previous research we established that data institutions tend to cover their 
costs through two or three different revenue streams, often with one dominant 
revenue source. Other research, such as the recent 2019 Census of Scholarly 
Communication Infrastructure Providers that mapped data institutions in the 
20
scholarly research and communication space, also notes that ‘a healthy diversity 
in revenue sources likely accounts for some of the success of [these 
organisations]’.  
In this research we found that, for some data institutions, a mix of revenue 
sources, beyond managing risk, can also help distribute the costs of providing 
data infrastructure more equitably among different stakeholders. Crossref is 
looking at diffusing the costs among its broader constituency to reflect who is 
using the data and therefore has a stake in ensuring its quality.  
We have also seen that for some organisations, diversified revenue streams may 
not be feasible, or indeed necessary. 
When diversified revenue streams may not work 
●Existing funding may not allow an organisation to spend time or expense 
on fundraising or developing other revenue streams. 
●There are benefits to a single source of funding, or one dominant source 
of funding. For example, it means that a direct correlation can be drawn 
between funding and impact. It is also simpler to build and maintain 
relationships with, and report to. a single stakeholder.  
17
 INMA (2019), ‘Conference Blog: Membership versus subscription models: Which one is 
better?’, 
https://www.inma.org/blogs/conference/post.cfm/membership-versus-subscription-models-wh
ich-one-is-better 
18
 Wikimedia (n.d.), ‘Wikimedia Endowment’, 
https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Endowment  
19
 Permanent.org (n.d.), ‘How We Use Donations’, 
https://www.permanent.org/what-we-do/our-endowment/how-we-use-donations/  
20
 Educopia Institute, (2019), ‘Mapping the Scholarly Communication Landscape 2019 Census’, 
https://educopia.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Census2019_EducopiaPublications.pdf 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   11 

 
 
●Some data institutions may be able to rely on revenue coming from a 
single group within their ecosystem as long as that group continues to see 
the value the institution provides. This might be, for example, a group of 
committed funders or members who are mandated by law to pay 
membership fees. 
●Some data institutions, for example public bodies, may not be able to 
accept funding from other sources. 
Revenue models across different roles  
While we have not observed definitive patterns, we have seen that some revenue 
models are only used when data institutions play particular roles, while others are 
common across different roles. For example, data institutions that maintain open 
databases such as OpenStreetMap and Musicbrainz often tend to receive at least 
part of their revenue from donations, sponsorships and fees for commercial use of 
data. Data institutions that combine or link data from different sources, and 
provide insights and other services exclusively to those that have contributed 
data, such as HiLo or Farmbench, seem to often use subscription and 
membership fees. Public and philanthropic grants, on the other hand, seem to be 
a common source of funding across most roles. 
We think that exploring the value of data institutions for key actors in their 
ecosystem can help us understand the revenue models that a data institution 
might be able to use. In our previous report, ​Designing sustainable data 
institutions,​ we introduced the ecosystem diagram below, outlining the different 
21
actors that contribute to and/or gain value from the presence of a data institution: 
data contributors, data users, decision makers (those able to make better 
decisions informed by the data analysed by their staff) and funders. By 
understanding what problems a data institution solves for these actors, we can 
start to explore who would be willing to pay for its services.  
21
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/article/designing-sustainable-data-institutions-paper/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   12 

 
 
 
Figure 1: ​Common actors and flows of value and data related to data institutions 
 
This thinking is also in line with the way the social sector tends to think about 
business models. Nonprofits often use adapted versions of the lean and business 
model canvases . These canvases are one-page templates for developing new 
2223
or documenting existing business models. The versions adapted for nonprofits 
highlight the two-sided nature of the markets in which they operate, addressing 
the needs of both their customers/beneficiaries and their funders. In the case of 
data institutions, we see multi-sided markets with data institutions serving the 
needs of (and potentially gaining revenue from) data contributors, data users, 
decision makers and funders. 
 
  
22
 Maurya, A (2018), ‘Why and How to Model a Non-profit on the Lean Canvas’, 
https://blog.leanstack.com/why-and-how-to-model-a-non-profit-on-the-lean-canvas-514e4acf1051 
23
 Social Business Model Canvas (n.d.), ​https://www.socialbusinessmodelcanvas.com/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   13 

 
 
Costs and cost management 
approaches 
To understand commonly occurring costs that data institutions need to cover, we 
used the Business Model Canvas as a framework. According to the canvas, the 
24
cost of operating an organisation’s business model is driven by its key activities and 
key resources. We asked eight data institutions across five of the six roles 
described above about their key activities and resources and how these shaped 
their costs. For more details on the research questions, see the ​Methodology 
section. 
 
We also asked them about the approaches that data institutions have taken to 
manage or minimize their costs, for example in response to financial pressures.  
 
According to the canvas, the key resources of an organisation – the most important 
assets needed to carry out the key activities – can be classified as follows: 
 
●Physical:​ such as computer equipment, office supplies, buildings and 
facilities, servers (although over time many of these have become rented 
resources)  
●Intellectual property: ​such as registered patents, brands, or copyrights 
●Human:​ staff 
●Financial: ​cashflow, working capital management and funding 
 
To understand the key activities of data institutions, we referred to the ODI’s Data 
Trust report that described activities that can take place in different stages of the 
25
lifecycle of a data trust, a type of data institution: scoping, co-design, launch, 
operate, evaluate, retire. In our interviews with data institutions, we focused on the 
main activities driving data institutions’ costs during each of these stages.  
 
24
 Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘The Business Model Canvas’, ​https://www.strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas  
25
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing trustworthy data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/article/designing-trustworthy-data-institutions-report/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   14 

 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The data institution lifecycle 
Key activities in different stages of a data 
institution’s lifecycle 
Some activities grow or shrink, are born or disappear, at different stages of an 
organisation’s development. 
For instance, initial scoping activities may include the development of a proof of 
concept and extensive talks with relevant stakeholders. In the co-design stage, 
the focus often shifts to technical platform development, user testing, 
communications, business development and marketing.  
As data institutions then become operational, development costs may decrease, 
although technical infrastructure maintenance and the development of new 
features may remain a significant cost. Continuous outreach and support to the 
community becomes a key priority as data institutions launch.  
Some activities, while present throughout several stages of a data institution’s 
lifecycle, tend to become more significant and cost more as data institutions move 
from scoping to co-design and launch and then into their operational stage. 
In many startups, the costs of support operations such as legal and accounting 
need to be covered as organisations become more established. As the 
organisation expands, so too will the volume of legal and accountancy activity 
needed. For example, one organisation noted that now that they’re ‘beginning to 
roll out paid-for services, [they] need to establish formal accounting processes. 
[They] will also need to fulfil certain financial reporting obligations as a nonprofit 
organisation and have sought support with this.’ 
Another cost category that may become significant is marketing and business 
development more broadly, that is the development of an organisation’s revenue 
and funding streams. This is especially true if the data institution focuses on 
generating its own commercial revenue or diversifying its government or 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   15 

 
 
philanthropic funding sources (which each have their own costs associated with 
fundraising activity).  
Data institutions, in some cases, can choose at what point they want to incur 
certain costs. This may be the case, for instance, for investment in long-term or 
capital assets such as data platforms which require significant investment of cash 
up front. Other costs might be present and not possible to defer. Data institutions, 
like other organisations facing capital investment decisions, can determine their 
capital needs, assess their ability to invest, and decide which capital expenditures 
are the best use of their resources.  
26
In some situations it may be preferable to develop a simple initial product or 
service more cheaply in order to launch faster, even if this may lead to greater 
costs down the line. For example, a data aggregator may choose to begin their 
project using a platform that already exists and customise it for their purpose. This 
could lead to an inferior product, but may allow the organisation to go live and/or 
to start to generate revenue sooner. Such a decision has to consider that building 
a purpose-built platform at a later stage may be a more complicated process than 
if it was done originally. In other situations, however, this slower investment may 
not be an available strategy for the organisation. For instance, if the data 
institution holds personal data so that it can be shared with others, it will need to 
reach higher levels of technology and security solutions quicker to build and 
maintain trust among data contributors. Similarly, there may be particular needs 
from data users, decision-makers or funders that a data institution has to take into 
account when making investment decisions. 
Most expensive resources and activities 
Resources 
Staff costs​ were the largest expense across the data institutions we have 
interviewed, which is in line with the general trend of ‘human resources being 
particularly prominent and valued in knowledge-intensive and creative industries’, 
perhaps due to the retention of experience and knowledge.  
Managing physical assets such as ​data servers​ was also described as costly.  
Centralised ​office spaces ​can be costly, and some organisations have decided to 
do without the cost and shift to a remote working model.  
One organisation, however, discussed how they were determined to keep the 
overhead costs of physical assets to a minimum in order to prioritise spending on 
key activities such as data collection. 
  
26
 Graybeal, P., Franklin, M., & Cooper, D. (2019), ‘Principles of Accounting, Volume 2: 
Managerial Accounting. Describe Capital Investment Decisions and How They Are Applied’, 
https://opentextbc.ca/principlesofaccountingv2openstax/chapter/describe-capital-investment-
decisions-and-how-they-are-applied/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   16 

 
 
Activities 
The activities that the data institutions mentioned as requiring extensive dedicated 
staff time and/or the time of external providers – and that therefore incur 
significant costs – include the following: 
●Technical infrastructure development and maintenance​ such as the 
building and maintenance of a platform, including the implementation of 
new features. Having good technical developers and engineers is of 
paramount importance to data institutions and developer salaries or rates 
tend to be high compared to many other skills that an organisation might 
need access to.  
●Data collection​, ​data curation​ and ​keeping the data up to date​. If a 
data institution operates in a sector with poor data-publishing maturity, it 
may need to do more work to manage the data. This could be the manual 
collection of data and the development of data ‘scrapers’ etc – for 
instance in the case of aggregators of publicly available or open data. Or it 
could mean that data contributors require significant support when 
uploading data. Data collection may also be costly if a data institution 
collects new primary data and needs to deploy new sensors or systems. 
●Developing a ​strategy and governance structure ​to manage the 
activities of an institution and foster trust by the community. Developing a 
strategy to guide what the organisation does and doesn’t do takes time 
and requires collaboration with different stakeholders. Designing 
appropriate governance mechanisms – the ‘systems and processes 
concerned with ensuring the overall direction, effectiveness, supervision 
and accountability of an organisation’ is also a time-intensive and 
27
important activity.  
●Community and user engagement. ​Running events and meetups, and 
offering onboarding of customers and ongoing customer support are also 
important and costly. This is even more challenging when a data 
institution is operating globally, like Crossref and ORCID, without having 
offices in other countries. How to staff the organisation to be able to 
engage the community effectively can be a big challenge.  
●Marketing and sales costs​. Where possible data institutions carry out 
direct marketing activities to grow their user base, to build the demand for 
their services. Marketing activities require planning and specific budgets, 
as do pursuing business development opportunities.  
Although these activities are fundamental to an organisation’s ability to operate 
successfully, it can be hard to raise public or philanthropic funding for them, as we 
will discuss later.  
The following section looks at how data institutions are, or could be, minimising 
costs to allow for the limited resources to be dedicated to activities that are key to 
their ability to achieve their mission. 
Ways to manage costs 
27
 NVCO (n.d.), ‘An introduction to governance’, 
https://knowhow.ncvo.org.uk/governance/getting-started-in-governance/getting-started-in-gov
ernance-1 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   17 

 
 
The table below summarises the main strategies we found for managing and/or 
minimising the costs of running data institutions. Many of these are methods 
commonly used by startups – such as outsourcing instead of hiring or operating 
28
in a virtual rather than a physical office space; and nonprofits – such as seeking 
29
in-kind donations, benefitting from nonprofit discounts, using volunteers and 
partnering with other organisations.  
 
Resource or 
activity 
category 
Ways to manage or minimise 
costs 
 
Consequences of cost-minimisation approach 
 
Marketing and 
sales costs 
 
Request that funders and similar 
supporting organisations market 
your organisations through their 
networks. 
This typically happens already and there are few 
downsides. It should be standard practice for 
organisations to market any organisation that 
they are funding or supporting in some way.  
Speak at events and panels in 
order to share your organisation 
and experiences. 
Events do not always pay speakers or offer 
expenses, therefore it is still a cost to cover.  
If offering paid-for services, having 
a free tier can: 
●attract users who may then 
pay for premium services 
●attract users who do not 
use the service frequently 
enough to justify paying for 
it, but can benefit from the 
service and grow the user 
base. 
There needs to be a clear distinction between the 
free and premium tier to ensure that the 
organisation is generating revenue from users. 
Some organisations may feel tempted to start 
commercialising more of the data gradually, 
which can squeeze the free tier.  
 
 
Strategy and 
governance 
Operate with minimal strategy or 
governance to oversee activities. 
Alternatives could include adopting 
governance structures that are run 
by volunteers, or leaning on 
pro-bono services and 
unremunerated advisory boards to 
help develop strategies. 
If they operate with minimal governance and 
strategy, organisations run the risk of not being 
able to access funding from philanthropic or 
grant givers, who routinely consider these issues 
when considering funding. Alternative 
governance structures will require time, planning 
and legal advice to establish.  
Hosting costs 
 
Finding cheaper physical hosting 
options. 
Outsourcing hosting means sacrificing a degree 
of control over the servers, meaning little input 
into maintenance or down times. This is not 
usually a significant challenge.  
  
Moving to cloud hosting. Cloud hosting has become the norm for most 
28
 BusinessLoad (2018), ‘Best Ways to Minimize Startup Costs’, 
https://www.businessload.com/startups/best-ways-to-minimize-startup-costs/ 
29
 AZCentral (n.d.), ‘Fundraising Ideas for a Nonprofit Organization’, 
https://yourbusiness.azcentral.com/fundraising-ideas-nonprofit-organization-4775.html 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   18 

 
 
organisations. Cloud servers may have bespoke 
offerings that can tie organisations into an 
ecosystem and then struggle to move to a 
different provider.  
Taking advantage of in-kind 
services or free credits for 
nonprofits/startups from a cloud 
provider. 
There is a risk that the in-kind or free credits for 
hosting may be withdrawn or charged for at a 
future date, leading to a later increase in costs.  
Reducing the volume of data 
stored. 
This might involve reducing the scope or scale of 
the product or services offered, which can affect 
users.  
Office rent 
costs 
Moving to smaller, cheaper and/or 
serviced offices. 
There may be a small loss of organisational 
identity.  
 
 
 
Using office space provided by 
others, as in-kind support. 
Working within another organisation's space may 
obstruct the building up of a unique 
organisational identity.  
Shifting to a fully remote workforce.  There will be new challenges around coordination 
and collaboration involved in managing a remote 
workforce.  
Staff costs Exploring in-kind services such as 
pro-bono legal support. 
Pro-bono support can be withdrawn or only 
offered infrequently. Organisations should ensure 
that budget is allocated for this eventuality.  
Using contractors or external 
service providers, saving cost by 
not paying a full annual salary and 
overheads. 
This is typical practice for legal and accountancy 
activities in small and medium-sized 
organisations.  
 
There is a risk that the organisation relies too 
heavily on the experience of external contractors, 
who are usually more costly over time. It also 
means that their experience and knowledge will 
be lost when their contract ends. Therefore 
finding a balance between core staff and 
freelance expertise is important.  
 
Inviting volunteers to contribute Running a volunteer system can be unreliable, 
and still requires staff members to organise, 
facilitate and train the volunteers. It can be 
difficult to obtain volunteer help for all activities. 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   19 

 
 
Technical 
development 
and data 
collection 
costs 
Seeking voluntary/crowd-sourced 
contributions can save costs in the 
case of collaborative maintenance 
or membership-based data 
institutions. 
Volunteer staffing is unpredictable and cannot 
necessarily be relied upon as a fixed level.  
 
Relying on community-led contributions may 
reduce costs for technology and data, but will 
require more time spent in activities such as 
community management, training, review and 
quality assurance.  
Using and developing open-source 
software can be less costly than 
using proprietary software and can 
help to avoid vendor lock-in. 
 
Using or building common 
platforms with similar organisations 
can reduce costs not only for 
individual data institutions but also 
for the sector as a whole. 
Open-source models are public and have no 
clear structure, and therefore rely on contributors 
and maintainers.  
 
There is a risk that the platform is not able to 
meet the needs of all individual organisations and 
that at some stage a data institution may need to 
decide to build its own platform – at which stage 
it might be more complicated to do that. The 
common platform may or may not continue to 
serve the needs of various organisations and 
may cease to exist if it doesn’t. 
Table 2: ​Examples of how data institutions can manage costs 
 
We discuss some of these strategies in more detail below.  
Using voluntary or crowd-sourced contributions​ can save costs, as 
mentioned above, but come with challenges. The benefits have been 
highlighted through various examples, such as the use of crowdsourcing by 
membership-driven news organisations to support the freedom of 
information request process, ‘taking some of the load off journalists, while 
also bringing members into the reporting process so that they value the final 
output more’. In this case, the support provided by members did not 
30
require specialised skills. In the case of OpenHumans, a project that 
enables individuals to steward personal data and to connect it with research 
and citizen science, the types of work needed require highly skilled labour 
which organisations can get through motivated volunteers for free. While 
benefiting from such experience is a huge boon for the organisation, it does 
mean that technical development is done at the whim of busy engineers. If 
no individuals are prepared to dedicate their time to do a particular piece of 
development at the time it is needed, then the organisation will have to pay 
high fees to compensate people to do it professionally.  
Crossref, in our conversations, has also mentioned how ​getting the community 
and members involved in building and tailoring tools​ can be an alternative to 
contracting that work out. ‘We have to look at our instinct of first ways to build 
traditional tools as any kind of commercial service would. When we have a 
community that is so willing to engage and do stuff, maybe we have to do things 
differently.’ This model worked in the beginning of the Wikimedia Foundation, 
which was run almost exclusively by volunteers in the first few years. Relying on 
30
 mySociety (2020), ‘Introducing WhatDoTheyKnow Projects’, 
https://www.mysociety.org/2020/07/24/whatdotheyknow-projects/ 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   20 

 
 
volunteers, however, as highlighted in our previous report, is not always a 
sustainable solution. “Relying on volunteers working in their spare time is not a 
reliable basis for essential infrastructure.” An exception to this may be 
31
OpenStreetMap, which has managed to operate on a largely voluntary basis since 
its inception. Indeed, the voluntary nature has enabled them to develop a global 
infrastructure that simply would not have been possible in the same timeframe, or 
without a large investment of funds, if they relied on paid staff.  
A general challenge in collaborative or open source development projects tends to 
be around the ​ability to plan ahead​. As Nadia Eghbal wrote for the Ford 
Foundation, ‘Current efforts to support digital infrastructure tend to be reactive 
and ad hoc. For existing projects, maintainers will benefit greatly from being able 
to plan for the next three to five years, not just six months to a year.’ 
32
One dilemma faced by organisations looking to set up a data institution that has 
fundamental cost implications is ​whether to create a new organisation or to 
launch a new initiative within an existing organisation​ or group of 
organisations. This dilemma has been particularly prominent in the scholarly 
research space where new organisations have been created for assigning and 
maintaining the identifiers of different things. There have been calls in the sector to 
‘further explore the value of mergers, migrations, and other mechanisms that may 
provide the necessary administrative, fiscal, and social infrastructure to help 
support the technical development and maintenance scholarly communications 
resources require. Scaled, leveraged efficiencies (for example, multiple programs 
hosted by a single entity with shared leadership and staffing) may help to bring 
needed expertise while also maintaining a lower overhead.’ 
33
Not launching a standalone organisation, as we saw in our previous report, can 
help keep costs low. The Research Organization Registry (ROR), a community-led 
project to develop an open, sustainable, usable, and unique identifier for every 
research organisation in the world, has remained a collaboration between partner 
organisations with most of its resources – human (team members), physical 
(servers) and financial (donations) – being provided as in-kind support to the 
project by these organisations. It may also help the organisation to be developed 
and grown within a safer setting. It can then be ‘spun out’ when ready. 
The counter argument has been that keeping a new project within an existing 
organisation can endanger the project’s success and may mean that the project 
cannot grow to the same extent as if it had to stand on its own two feet. For ROR, 
that risk has been diffused by the project being run by multiple existing 
organisations. 
Several data institutions we spoke with – particularly the relatively young ones – 
mentioned that ​running the organisation with minimal overhead ​is a key 
strategy to sustain their operations. ROR highlighted that ‘the Covid-19 pandemic 
has reinforced its existing assumptions and goals that running ROR with minimal 
31
 The Scholarly Kitchen (2019), ‘Building for the Long Term: Why Business Strategies are 
Needed for Community-Owned Infrastructure’, 
https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2019/08/01/building-for-the-long-term-why-business-strate
gies-are-needed-for-community-owned-infrastructure/  
32
 Ford Foundation (2016), ‘Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure’ 
https://www.fordfoundation.org/media/2976/roads-and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behind-our-digital-in
frastructure.pdf  
33
 Educopia Institute, (2019), ‘Mapping the Scholarly Communication Landscape 2019 Census’, 
https://educopia.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Census2019_EducopiaPublications.pdf 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   21 

 
 
overhead and with flexible and diverse sources of funding is key to its 
sustainability and will allow it to remain nimble and adaptable in a constantly 
shifting landscape’. ROR also benefited from managing a comparatively small 
dataset, making it easier to not have the need to launch a new organisation to 
manage it. Open Apparel Registry said that they would find ways to reduce 
overheads by any means necessary to support certain key activities. They would 
much rather cut office space, for instance, so that they could afford to pay the 
best technical developers in their space.  
 
The strategies we discussed to lower costs can help data institutions better 
manage some costs. A too-heavy focus on cost minimisation, however, could risk 
leading to data institutions adopting a cost-driven business model, where 
34
keeping overheads low becomes the primary focus and less emphasis is placed 
on delivering value. This is likely a reality of operating in a competitive, nonprofit 
space but must be considered by funders interested in supporting these 
organisations. Cost reduction must be balanced against any knock-on effect on 
the impact that can be delivered.  
 
  
34
 Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘How do I use the Cost Structure building block of the Business Model 
Canvas?’, 
https://strategyzer.uservoice.com/knowledgebase/articles/1194382-how-do-i-use-the-cost-str
ucture-building-block-of  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   22 

 
 
Support from funders and 
other actors 
In our previous report, ​Designing sustainable data institutions, we talked about 
35
the difficulties data institutions encounter accessing certain types of funding. Data 
institutions are often nonprofits so may struggle to access debt financing and 
venture capital for example. As nonprofits tend to rely more on philanthropic and 
government funding, especially in the early stages of their existence when their 
ability to earn revenue is also limited, we focused our research on public and 
philanthropic funders.  
We explored what makes funders interested in funding data institutions, and 
whether the way grant funding is awarded is aligned with the needs of data 
institutions.  
In our research we have seen examples of data institutions successfully getting off 
the ground through grants they have secured to cover scoping, co-design and 
launch costs. Existing research, like the 2019 Census of Scholarly Communication 
Infrastructure Providers has, however, suggested that it can be challenging to 
36
attract longer-term funding for data institutions:  ’If you have a good idea, it’s not 
that hard to get a grant or financial backing to build out that idea, but once it 
exists, how do you keep it running? There’s not a lot of funding out there for long 
term maintenance (and by maintenance, I mean continuous updating and 
upgrading) of existing services or tools.’ This experience was echoed by one of 
37
the data institutions we spoke with that described how “grant makers want to fund 
something new.”  
This becomes an issue in two ways for data institutions. First, funders are more 
likely to fund a new project or organisation than continue to pay to maintain an 
existing one. Second, existing institutions who need money to maintain their 
infrastructure and services may find it harder to acquire funding for their ongoing 
operations. They are not offering a new product, they simply need money to 
maintain their existing one – which is less appealing for funders.  
We explored whether continued public or philanthropic funding into the 
operational stage of data institutions is a viable option to help support the growth 
of data institutions and allow them to develop long-term sustainable funding and 
revenue models. For more details on the research questions, see the ​Methodology 
section. 
35
 ​Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Designing sustainable data institutions’ 
https://theodi.org/article/designing-sustainable-data-institutions-paper/  
36
 Educopia Institute (2019), ‘Why Are So Many Scholarly Communication Infrastructure 
Providers Running a Red Queen’s Race?’, ​https://educopia.org/red-queens-race/  
37
 The Scholarly Kitchen (2019), ‘Building for the Long Term: Why Business Strategies are 
Needed for Community-Owned Infrastructure’, 
https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2019/08/01/building-for-the-long-term-why-business-strate
gies-are-needed-for-community-owned-infrastructure/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   23 

 
 
 
Government and philanthropic funding 
What are funders interested in? 
Philanthropy has begun to see the benefits of funding projects with a specific 
focus on increasing access to data in order to achieve their desired outcomes. 
These outcomes are typically framed around specific social, research, educational 
or charitable goals in areas such as health, education and arts.  
This is demonstrated through examples such as the UK Biobank being funded for 
the past 16 years by Wellcome and others to move health research forward, and 
the OpenActive initiative being funded by Sport England to promote healthy 
lifestyles and increased physical activity. Data institutions can help government 
and philanthropic funders deliver on these strategic goals. Being different to the 
kind of charitable projects which funders traditionally support, there is, however, a 
pronounced need for a strong narrative around how data institutions contribute to 
the community and broader social aims. 
Other funding organisations, such as the McGovern Foundation, have been 
established to focus on delivering change through data and technology. These 
funders, although fewer in number, seek to more directly fund organisations 
whose mission is focused on maximising the benefits of data and technology for 
society rather than delivering predefined outcomes across more traditional 
charitable focus areas.  
Type of funding provided 
There has long been discussion about the persistent underfunding of overhead 
costs in the nonprofit sector and the consequent vicious cycle, in terms of 
nonprofits not being comfortable enough to be transparent about their true costs 
and funders continuing to have unrealistic expectations around the costs needed 
to run a nonprofit. As we have seen, many of the activities that are central to 
38
data institutions’ ability to operate successfully – and that incur significant costs – 
tend to fall into the category of overheads, which tend to not be fully covered in 
project funding.  
The funders we interviewed said that the philanthropic sector is changing how it 
funds. Long term, core, often unrestricted funding is becoming common practice 
among some funders, with the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation almost exclusively 
granting unrestricted core funding. Research from the Ford Foundation shows that 
727 different grant makers have pledged to loosen or eliminate restrictions on their 
funding, and put trust in their nonprofit partners to find the best solutions for the 
people they serve. This has led to better results during the coronavirus pandemic
39
. Despite this positive outlook, investigating the wider trend data (from funders 
38
 Gregory A., & Howard, D., (2009), ‘The Nonprofit Starvation Cycle’, 
https://ssir.org/articles/entry/the_nonprofit_starvation_cycle  
39
 The Chronicle of Philanthropy (2020), ‘How This Crisis May Upend Grant Making for Good’, 
https://www.philanthropy.com/article/How-the-Coronavirus-Crisis-May/248352  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   24 

 
 
who have shared data with 360Giving) from 2013 to 2018 suggests that the overall 
amount of core funding has remained consistent. 
40
In our interviews, funders who gave core funding expressed how it ‘enables the 
people who do the work the greatest flexibility in order to maximize the chances of 
success’ (Wellcome). This is supported by the findings of recent research from the 
Esmée Fairbairn Foundation, which suggest that grants for organisations’ core 
costs, and in particular unrestricted grants, pay dividends as they are more likely 
to help unlock other funding sources for organisations and therefore diversify their 
revenue streams. The research also shows how core funding enables evolution, 
41
as it allows organisations to try new things, take risks and learn, and to respond to 
opportunities and challenges in rapidly changing contexts.  
The same research outlines the benefits of providing long term grants, five years 
or more, in freeing organisations to concentrate on delivery and impact. 
Conversely, other funders continue to have reservations about unrestricted 
funding, and are nervous about the money being used for purposes which they 
hadn’t envisaged. One way which the funders we spoke to were able to alleviate 
concerns around unrestricted funding is by building effective due diligence 
frameworks, for example through audit requirements, seats on the data 
institution’s board, and staggered release of funding based on meeting 
pre-agreed milestones.  
Funding for different lifecycle stages  
Several funders we spoke to expressed a keener interest in funding the early stage 
start-up costs of organisations rather than funding them perpetually. There is an 
expectation that data institutions will diversify their funding streams over time and 
to reach some level of sustainability. For example, McGovern ‘enthusiastically 
seed early stages and pilots, with the hope that successful models then find 
additional funding to take them further’. The funders we spoke with recognised 
that for many data institutions who seek to deliver a public benefit, it may be 
inappropriate to look for sustainability through earned revenue.They said that data 
institutions may instead reach sustainability through a diverse range of funding 
sources: from other philanthropic donors, public funding and, in cases where 
appropriate, earned revenue models. 
 
UK Biobank, funded by Wellcome and the Medical Research Council 
The UK Biobank is a registered charity and major health resource. It aims to 
improve the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a wide range of serious and 
life-threatening illnesses. 500,000 people aged between 40 and 69 years old in 
2006–2010 from across the UK have undergone testing, provided blood, urine 
and saliva samples for future analysis, given detailed information about 
40
 The Institute for Voluntary Action Research (2018), ‘3 things to notice from 'Slice and Dice' - 
a tool to explore GrantNav data visually’, 
https://www.ivar.org.uk/3-things-to-notice-from-slice-and-dice-a-tool-to-explore-grantnav-dat
a-visually/ 
41
 The Esmee Fairbairn Foundation (2019), ‘Insights on core funding’, 
https://www.esmeefairbairn.org.uk/userfiles/Documents/Publications/InsightsOnCoreFunding.p
df 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   25 

 
 
themselves and agreed to have their health followed to create one of the largest 
health databases in the world. The UK Biobank relies on grant-based core 
funding and project funding for delivering specific enhancements. Charges to 
access the data are based on a cost-recovery model, with reduced fees for 
student projects and those from low and middle-income countries. 
Wellcome is a politically and financially independent foundation, which supports 
researchers, takes on big health challenges, campaigns for better science, and 
helps people get involved with science and health research. They are flexible 
and generally long term with their funding in order to help them achieve their 
goal of moving science forward. They believe that where they are appropriate, 
flexible grants allow organisations with expertise to push forward without 
restrictions. They have supported the UK Biobank for about 15 years, reviewing 
their support every five years.  
The UK Biobank is an interesting example of a data institution, or a scientific 
resource as it’s more commonly described, being able to attract steady funding 
directly alongside third party investment in enriching the resource as it continues 
to evolve at the cutting edge. Wellcome described to us how the UK Biobank 
has continued to be enriched as a resource through additional projects 
undertaken by third parties, such as the Whole Genome Sequencing project. 
These kinds of projects continually add value to the UK Biobank: the Whole 
Genome Sequencing project reflected a £200 million in further scientific 
research. 
 
 
Requirements for measuring impact 
Measuring impact is an important condition of any public or philanthropic grant. 
Funders want to ensure that their spending has contributed to the change they 
want to see in the world. This can be difficult for data institutions and other data 
access initiatives, particularly due to the ongoing challenge of measuring the value 
of data and its impact on the economy.  
42
Some of the funders we spoke to, such as the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation, 
McGovern and the National Lottery Fund, understand these difficulties and 
emphasised that they do not require organisations to conduct rigorous impact 
assessments. These funders expect organisations seeking funding to outline a set 
of short term quantifiable measures, alongside a clear hypothesis of what the 
organisation believes they can achieve, by when, and what good would look like 
to them.  
 
42
The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘The Value of Data’, 
https://theodi.org/article/the-value-of-data/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   26 

 
 
HiLo Maritime Risk Management, initially funded by the Lloyd’s Register 
Foundation 
HiLo Maritime Risk Management is an independent nonprofit organisation which 
aims to save lives in the shipping industry by changing the way companies 
address risk. HiLo collects data from shipping companies, runs it through a 
predictive risk model, and offers insights back to the companies. HiLo is 
currently funded through subscription fees from these companies, but has 
received significant early stage funding from, among others, the Lloyd’s Register 
Foundation.  
The Lloyd’s Register Foundation is a UK charity established in 2012. Its mission 
is to secure high technical standards of design, manufacture, construction, 
maintenance, operation and performance for the purpose of enhancing the 
safety of life and property at sea, on land, and in the air, alongside the 
advancement of public education including within the transportation industries 
and any other engineering and technological disciplines. It sees opportunities in 
helping low-technology organisations and sectors to get the benefits of 
technology and data. It sees its impact manifesting in two ways: through the 
improved capacity of the funded organisation itself, and through the broader 
impact that the data creates.  
The Foundation mainly funds early stage costs, and expects organisations to 
become sustainable in the long term. It sees its role as a catalyst for 
organisations to embrace data and technology to save lives. It funds a mix of 
start-up costs and project work for organisations to develop new competencies 
and capacities. 
Through funding projects like HiLo, the Foundation is working towards achieving 
its goal of making the world a safer place. In a world where safety levels were 
flatlining over the last 10 years, investing in a data project like HiLo has, for the 
foundation, seen a greater impact than investing in more conventional applied 
safety spending’. According to 2019 figures, thanks to HiLo there has been a 
72% reduction in the risk of lifeboat accidents and a 65% reduction in the risk 
of engine room fires on participating ships. 
Other support  
Funding is just one type of support that data institutions can benefit from, and 
there are several others that can help data institutions grow and become 
sustainable. Some of this support can come from funders who may be in a 
position to offer specialised expertise directly in some areas or may have contacts 
at organisations who in turn can offer support. At other times this support may 
come from private sector companies – who may see this as part of their corporate 
social responsibility efforts or an opportunity for staff development – or from 
governmental actors.  
Data institutions will need to think of the entirety of the support that they need to 
operate successfully and pursue different avenues to obtain this support. They will 
also need to recognise that there are organisational risks if they rely on free or 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   27 

 
 
reduced-rate support and assume they will not need significant investment. 
Pro-bono or discounted services may not be available indefinitely, and data 
institutions may eventually have to start covering the costs of the associated 
services.  
The table below summarises the types of support that data institutions may need 
and where this support may come from. 
Type of 
support 
Description of support Who can offer that support? 
Technology 
support 
Data institutions can benefit 
from advice on the best 
technologies to use, such 
as cloud servers, web 
hosting, and coding, and 
support in setting them up. 
Auditing and assessing 
suitable external suppliers 
can also be beneficial.  
Data institutions may also 
need support in back-end 
operations, or skills training 
so that their own staff can 
develop expertise.  
Technology support can be offered 
by technology companies and 
consultancy firms. 
For some organisations with 
charitable aims, some tech 
companies may be able to provide 
free or reduced-rate access to their 
offerings, for example Slack for 
Charities, Google for Nonprofits, or 
discounted cloud services.  
Legal, 
administrative 
and 
accountancy 
support 
It is not uncommon for 
relatively new data 
institutions to operate with 
minimal staff members, and 
for small teams dedicated 
legal, administrative and 
accountancy staff may not 
be necessary.  
Pro-bono support can come from 
legal firms. Fiscal hosting or fiscal 
43
sponsorship is a model that enables 
44
administrative costs to be borne by a 
host organisation who acts as a fiscal 
sponsor. Fiscal hosts - see some 
examples here and here - can 
4546
have different missions and cover 
different geographies. 
Organisational 
development 
and other 
specialised 
support 
 
 
The founders of data 
institutions may require 
mentorship or training in 
key areas of organisational 
development, including but 
not limited to: revenue 
generation, vision and 
strategy development, 
service design, marketing, 
staffing, evaluation, and 
One of the institutions we interviewed 
spoke about the positive experience 
of their main funder connecting them 
with similar organisations who could 
offer them advice or collaborate with 
them. That funder also helped to 
source participants for user research.  
 
Support in key areas of 
organisational development may be 
43
 Open Collective (n.d.), ‘FAQ - What is a fiscal host?’, 
https://docs.opencollective.com/help/fiscal-hosts/fiscal-hosts 
44
 Wikipedia (n.d.), ‘Fiscal sponsorship’, ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiscal_sponsorship 
45
 Open Collective (n.d.), ‘Hosts’, ​https://opencollective.com/hosts 
46
 Global Impact (n.d.), ‘Fiscal sponsorship’, ​https://charity.org/fiscal-sponsorship  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   28 

 
 
governance – areas where it 
is difficult to find volunteers 
with expertise.  
offered ‘pro bono’ by consultancy 
firms.  
 
Funders and other actors may use 
their networks to provide free 
marketing for data institutions by 
sharing their successes.  
Sector level 
coordination 
and support 
for data 
institutions 
There are initiatives that 
support both data 
institutions and funders with 
the aim of coordinating 
efforts to increase access 
to data in specific sectors. 
Support can include the 
provision of advice and 
shared services to data 
institutions, advocacy on 
behalf of them, the 
provision of funding 
structure for the sector or 
advice to funders on where 
their investment may 
contribute to most impact.  
 
Invest in Open Infrastructure aims 
47
to enable durable, scalable, and long 
lasting open scientific and scholarly 
infrastructure. Invest in Open 
coordinates efforts across the 
scholarly research and 
communications space, providing 
data institutions with guidance and 
resources as well as supporting 
funders’ decisions through targeted 
research and recommendations for 
investment to support high-impact 
projects and organisations.  
48
 
Another example in the open access 
and open science space is the Global 
Sustainability Coalition for Open 
Science Services (SCOSS) formed 
49
by a network of organisations to ‘help 
secure infrastructure well into the 
future’. SCOSS helps ‘to identify 
50
non-commercial services essential to 
Open Science, and to make qualified 
recommendations on which of these 
services should be considered for 
funding support. SCOSS [then] 
provides the framework and funding 
structure, vetting potential 
candidates based on a defined set of 
criteria.’  
 
Proposals for similar initiatives in the 
scholarly research space include the 
Open Platform Initiative and David 
Lewis’s ‘2.5%’ provocation. The 
51
47
 Invest in Open Infrastructure (n.d.), ​https://investinopen.org/  
48
 Ibid 
49
 SCOSS (n.d.), ‘What is SCOSS?’, ​https://scoss.org/what-is-scoss/  
50
 SCOSS (n.d.), ‘Help sustain open infrastructure’, ​https://scoss.org/help-sustain-open-infra/  
51
 Educopia Institute (2019), ‘Why Are So Many Scholarly Communication Infrastructure 
Providers Running a Red Queen’s Race?’, ​https://educopia.org/red-queens-race/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   29 

 
 
Open Platform Initiative aims to 
52
bring financial, strategic, and 
institutional coherence to 
community-built, interoperable, 
service-driven infrastructure and 
software projects that support the 
preservation and access of 
scholarship and knowledge. David 
Lewis argues in his article that 
‘academic libraries should commit 
2.5% of their total budgets to 
organizations and projects that 
contribute. to the common digital 
infrastructure need to support the 
open scholarly commons’.  
53
Table 3: ​Types of support offered to data institutions and who can support them   
52
 Carter, L., Cooper, Y., & Thornton, A. (2019), ‘The Open Platform Initiative: A proposal for 
coherence and interdependence in Community-owned Infrastructure’, 
https://www.arl.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/mm19sp-OpenPlatformInitiative-Carter-Coop
er-Thornton.pdf 
53
 Lewis, D. W. (2017), ‘The 2.5% Commitment’, 
https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/handle/1805/14063  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   30 

 
 
Conclusions and 
recommendations 
Below we include our recommendations for 
●data institutions​ and those interested in ​setting up​ data institutions,  
●funders​, and ​other actors​ who are interested in ​supporting​ the creation 
and sustainability of data institutions.  
These recommendations complement the recommendations in our previous report 
in two ways: 
●We include recommendations for data institutions around cost 
management and demonstrating the impact of their work 
●We include recommendations for funders and other actors in addition to 
those for data institutions 
 
Recommendations for those scoping, designing 
and running data institutions 
Understand and communicate the value you offer to key actors in your data 
ecosystem  
Articulating a data institution’s value for key actors in its ecosystem can go a long 
way in making the case for appropriate  revenue models. For instance, having a 
clear narrative on how increased access to data enables a particular social, 
educational or charitable outcome in support of a funder’s strategy can help 
demonstrate the data institution’s value in a way that’s not always evident when 
describing the organisation’s role in terms of stewarding access to data. Existing 
institutions can run activities such as evaluations of previous work or developing 
robust Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) frameworks.  
Develop and iterate an evaluation plan to demonstrate impact 
Measuring impact is a challenge for long-term projects, particularly when there are 
no key performance indicators available to match that impact. It is important to 
establish, early, a hypothesis of how your work will contribute to long-term impact. 
Use any available broader evidence about the impact of increasing access to 
data, including the impact similar organisations have had, to demonstrate your 
contribution to change. Consideration of what would not be possible without the 
work of your data institution can also be used to indicate impact. In addition, 
outline the short and medium term expected results and corresponding indicators 
that you will use to track progress. Review and iterate these indicators over time.  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   31 

 
 
A variety of resources are available to help you develop and conduct evaluations. 
The Better Evaluation knowledge platform for instance has information on 
54
methods and processes plus approaches and thematic pages, events and 
resources on evaluation. Guidance on evaluation planning and impact 
measurement might also be available from government or philanthropic funders, 
often tailored to relevant sectors, such as Sport England’s Evaluation Framework
55
, as well as from international organisations such as the World Bank’s guidance on 
designing a results framework. A useful list of resources is available through 
56
gov.uk. 
57
To do all the above, make sure that during the design of your data institution you 
put aside some budget and resources for monitoring and evaluation purposes. 
Be transparent about the full costs of running data institutions  
Our research has demonstrated that there are a number of costs associated with 
running a data institution that are not typically funded. For example, in the 
Nonprofit Finance Fund 2015 survey into the nonprofit sector, only 7 percent of 
organisations reported that foundations always cover the full costs of the projects 
they fund.  Data institutions have spoken about the need for core funding and 
58
overhead support. Documenting these costs and selling the value in the activities 
they help to cover can boost the chances of obtaining funding for the full costs of 
running data institutions.  
Understand the consequences of cost management strategies 
In the absence of comprehensive funding, data institutions will have to make 
decisions about the resources and activities they spend their limited resources on. 
Strategies to manage costs come with their own risks and data institutions should 
understand and consider the long-term consequences of different cost 
management approaches. 
Recommendations for those funding and 
supporting data institutions 
Identify opportunities to align your approach with other funders 
Data institutions are new types of organisations that can offer a new opportunity 
for funders to deliver on their public and social impact goals. But these institutions 
would benefit from funders and other actors telling their success stories and 
54
 Better Evaluation (n.d.), ​https://www.betterevaluation.org/  
55
 Sport England (n.d.), ‘Evaluation Framework’, ​https://evaluationframework.sportengland.org/  
56
 Independent Evaluation Group (2012), ‘Designing a results framework for achieving results: A 
how-to guide’, 
https://www.oecd.org/dac/peer-reviews/WB%202012%20designing%20results%20framework
.pdf  
57
 Public Health England (2018), ‘Introduction to logic models’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/evaluation-in-health-and-well-being-overview/intr
oduction-to-logic-models  
58
 Nonprofit Finance Fund (2015), ‘2015 State of the Nonprofit Sector Survey - A Field in Flux: 
Reaching for Sustainability’, 
https://nff.org/sites/default/files/nff/docs/2015-survey_natl_summary.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   32 

 
 
reinforcing the narrative about how their work is contributing to wider social and 
economic impact. Funders can help create a better understanding of the role and 
value of these institutions and build more support for them by talking with other 
funders and developing alignment across funding goals. Sharing stories of why 
and how they fund data institutions, and what successes and challenges they 
have experienced along the way, can be the first step towards that alignment. 
Funders should also engage in conversations about the role they see for 
themselves and others in supporting sustainable data institutions. Data institutions 
are seen in many different ways by different funders which, considering the public 
benefit that data institutions aim to bring, raises questions about who is ultimately 
responsible for funding them. One interesting suggestion, which came from 
Wellcome, argues that resources which create global impact, like the UK Biobank, 
could be funded at a global level, opening up funding from a broader range of 
organisations. Coordination and alignment among those funding or supporting 
data institutions – through shared approaches and complementary funding – 
could help both international and domestic data institutions to become more 
sustainable.  
Support data institutions to grow beyond their core activities 
Unlocking additional funding or exploring new revenue sources takes time and 
resources. Funders can support data institutions by specifically funding activities 
to develop sustainable business models or providing funding that can be used for 
that purpose. They can more directly support some of these activities if, for 
instance, they are able to provide expert business development support, or help 
connect the data institution with organisations that can provide such support and 
more broadly through helping the data institution build a stronger network.  
Funders should also consider supporting data institutions in conducting 
evaluations and measuring their impact over time. This may be something which 
data institutions typically find to be difficult, so ensuring they have the necessary 
skills and funding to evaluate their projects successfully would be a further lever to 
create change. 
Clearly articulate your approach to funding data institutions 
Several funders suggested that it was not the role of philanthropy or government 
to support data institutions perpetually. So, in order for funders to feel confident 
about the sustainability of a data institution, and for data institutions to have 
reassurance about the financial support they need to get started, funders must set 
clear requirements for data institutions to follow. 
An example of this, which some of the funders we spoke to use, may be to require 
that a data institution put forward a business plan for the short, medium and long 
terms alongside an agreement around staggered milestones for the release of 
funds based on hitting pre-agreed targets. This enables the funders to see a path 
to exiting their support for the organisation once it has reached sustainability, and 
reassures the data institution that they’ll be supported throughout the early stages 
of their journey. Plotting the path to sustainability together builds trust, and gives 
each party a stronger sense of co-ownership over the project. 
  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   33 

 
 
Next steps 
At the ODI, we’ve established the data institutions programme to help 
59
organisations, people and communities build new data institutions, such as the 
types described in this report, and help existing organisations to recognise and 
strengthen their roles. Our data institutions programme seeks to 
●provide advice to people, communities and organisations building data 
institutions, and enable existing organisations to recognise their role as 
data institutions and to steward data on behalf of others more effectively 
●support data institutions in their early stages, through stimulus funding, 
60
dedicated peer networks and incubation 
●advocate for data institutions and responsible data stewardship, through 
exploring the role of legislation and other policies in creating an enabling 
environment for data institutions 
●collaborate with like-minded organisations to create new data institutions 
in different sectors and fields. 
●make significant advances in the theory and understanding of data 
institutions, and the roles they can play, as well as developing tools and 
guidance to support data institutions through the problems they face. 
To follow on from this report, we will continue to explore and test our findings 
through a product discovery phase with existing and nascent data institutions and 
data access initiatives. We will be working to develop a tool, service or guidance 
which will support existing data institutions and those looking to set up new ones, 
to overcome the barriers to achieving sustainability. In order to develop a tool or 
service to benefit data institutions, we may specifically look at 
●The details of specific activities where they encountered difficulties, and 
what they would need to overcome these barriers. 
●The support they have previously received or would have liked to receive. 
●The key moments in the journey to sustainability where support is most 
effective. 
●How the costs of running a data institution are driven by the role the data 
institution plays in its ecosystem. 
  
59
 Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Project: Data Institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-data-institutions/  
60
 Open Data Institute (n.d.), ‘Project: Data Access Stimulus Fund’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-data-access-stimulus-fund/  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   34 

 
 
Methodology 
We identified a list of organisations that met the criteria of data institutions and we 
mapped them against different categories defined in previous research. Once 
those organisations were identified, we carried out desk research into their 
approach to sustainability – their business and revenue models and their main 
activities, resources and associated costs. We conducted desk research about 
these institutions and, where possible, interviewed their representatives to expand 
the information. We also identified a list of government and philanthropic funders 
who could feasibly fund the creation of data institutions in the UK and, where 
possible, spoke with their representatives. 
The short timeframe of our research led to several limitations. 
1.Limited number of interviews with data institutions and public and 
philanthropic funders. 
2.Focus on either relatively new or ‘successful’ data institutions. Our 
research has not covered any failed institutions and therefore has not 
resulted in any lessons about challenges that could not be overcome.  
3.Potential bias towards funders who fund or have some interest in funding 
data institutions or other data stewardship models. 
4.Potential sector bias. We prioritised the health and energy/climate sectors 
both for data institutions and funders in line with the UK government’s 
industrial strategy themes.  
61
Research questions 
Main research question​: How can we support data institutions to become 
sustainable? 
Secondary research questions 
1.What activities are these organisations required to engage in while 
scoping, designing, operating, evaluating, re-designing and closing a data 
institution?  
2.What are the associated costs of these activities? 
3.What challenges do these organisations encounter while carrying out 
these activities? 
4.What methods do these organisations engage in to reduce the costs of 
these activities? 
5.What methods do these organisations have for generating funding to 
support these activities?  
6.What factors should organisations choosing different business models or 
funding strategies take into account? 
61
 Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (2019), ‘The Grand Challenge 
missions’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-strategy-the-grand-challenges/mission
s  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   35 

 
 
Desk research 
For each of the data institutions studied, we gathered information related to 
●General information about the organisation – core goals or mission, legal 
form, sector and establishment  
●Type of data institution – the functions it fulfils or services it provides 
●Revenue model – current, past and anticipated future revenue sources 
●Alignment of the organisation’s business model with its core goals 
●Main activities and costs. 
Interviews 
Interviews with data institutions 
 
Criteria to select data institutions 
 
In our research we wanted to understand the experience of a diverse set of 
organisations. We aimed to cover a range of data institutions that: 
 
●Have different maturity levels 
●Fulfil different data ecosystem roles 
●Operate across a variety of sectors with a priority for health and 
energy/climate 
●Use different revenue models (based on our existing knowledge and 
additional desk research) 
●Offer applicability of learning for others. 
 
We’ve interviewed or sought information by email from representatives of eight 
data institutions: 
 
●Musicbrainz 
●Open Apparel Registry  
●CrossRef 
●ROR  
●OpenCorporates  
●UK Biobank 
●Creative Diversity Network  
●Open Humans  
We asked data institutions about their: 
1.Revenue models 
2.Key activities and resources and associated costs 
3.Challenges in carrying out key activities 
4.Strategies to reduce costs of key activities and resources 
5.Funding challenges and desired support 
6.About any recent changes in context – for example the Covid-19 
pandemic. 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   36 

 
 
 
Funder interviews 
 
We also wanted to understand the perspective of funders around supporting the 
growth and sustainability of data institutions. 
Criteria to select funders 
We aimed to cover funders that: 
●do and don’t fund data institutions or other data access initiatives (based 
on our existing knowledge and information available from 360Giving) 
●fund UK focused projects 
●fund projects in the health and/or energy/climate sectors. 
To compile our list, we contacted the first 10 funders in the list of the ​top ten 
grantmaking charities and trusts in the UK​. We also reviewed the first ten 
62
foundations on a list of the ​wealthiest charitable foundations around the world 
63
with a view to prioritising those that would potentially find UK based projects.  
We’ve interviewed representatives of eight different foundations: 
 
●The National Lottery Community Fund 
●Lloyd’s Register Foundation 
●Sport England 
●Esmee Fairbairn Foundation 
●Patrick McGovern Foundation 
●Paul Hamlyn Foundation 
●Indigo Trust 
●Wellcome 
 
The questions asked during the one-hour interviews covered themes related to 
their: 
1.funding strategy 
2.types of project funded and types of funding provided (for instance core 
or project funding and length of funding) 
3.openness and/or ability to fund different stages of a data institution’s 
lifecycle 
4.expectations around data institutions becoming sustainable. 
Sampling method 
Research participants, both data institutions and funders, were identified using the 
ODI’s existing network supplemented by desk research and snowball sampling, 
building on the network of existing ODI partners. 
 
62
 fundsforNGOS (2014), ‘Top 10 Grantmaking Charities and Trusts in the UK’, 
https://www.fundsforngos.org/featured-articles/top-10-grantmaking-charities-trusts-uk/  
63
 Wikipedia (n.d.), ‘List of wealthiest charitable foundations’, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_wealthiest_charitable_foundations  
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportData institutions: reducing costs and improving sustainability   37 