

 

 
 
What is this playbook for?2 
What is a challenge prize?2 
Who is this playbook for?3 
What do you need to get started?3 
How to use this framework3 
Section one: Identify your data challenge prize topic and problem5 
Characteristics of health data challenge prize problems5 
Challenge statement6 
Section two: Understand the data landscape7 
Undertake desk research on the challenge topic area8 
List, interview and map your stakeholders8 
Develop your theory of change and evaluation structure12 
Review the legal, regulatory and policy context15 
Make a data inventory16 
Section three: Design your challenge prize17 
Appendix 1: Main phases of work in a challenge prize19 
Appendix 2: Examples of relevant data sets20 
Appendix 3: Additional resources21 
 
 
  
May 2020 

 
What is this playbook 
for?  
 
This playbook has been designed to help you identify and scope a ‘challenge prize’ to 
help drive innovative uses of data in health. Challenge prizes are just one method but 
there are ​many others​ to choose from, depending on what you are looking to achieve. 
This playbook provides advice on designing challenges that are centred on the use of 
data in health, and providing tips, methodologies and links to useful resources.  
 
If you are looking for a wider introduction to challenge prizes and how to design and 
deliver them, we recommend reading the ​Nesta Challenge Prizes Guide​.  
 
We plan to update this playbook as part of future projects, so please send any feedback 
to ​info@theodi.org​. 
 
Data is moving from being scarce and difficult to process, to being abundant and easy to 
use – when it is made available in the right way. Data innovation can enable businesses, 
startups, governments, individuals and communities to create more efficient and effective 
services and products, fuelling economic growth and productivity. This is particularly true 
in the health sector, where data innovation can have a big impact on complex health 
problems. 
 
The first section​ of the playbook provides guidance on how to identify a problem to be 
solved through a challenge prize.  
 
The second section​ takes you through steps to scope out the problem in more detail 
and to start thinking about how to design your challenge prize. This scoping phase 
includes step-by-step guidance, suggested tools and processes, and examples.  
 
The third section​ takes you through some steps to design your challenge prize and 
summarise the work you’ve done, including phasing, budgeting and putting a proposition 
together. 
What is a challenge prize? 
An open prize in which a financial reward is levied in order to motivate a wide pool of 
innovators to respond to a specific social or technical ‘challenge’ or problem which isn’t 
being solved with usual innovation methods and therefore would benefit from a wide pool 
of innovators looking to tackle the issue with unorthodox thinking or methods.  
May 2020 

 
Who is this playbook 
for?  
This playbook is primarily aimed at funders and people working with funders, or other 
organisations who are looking to solve problem-specific societal challenges related to 
health, by leveraging data to stimulate innovation. 
What do you need to get started? 
To start scoping your data challenge prize, we recommend you read the ​Nesta 
Challenge Prizes Guide​ as a broader introduction to challenge prizes and also have: 
 
●An initial idea or an area of expertise, interest or passion for a data-driven 
solution 
●A team that can work on scoping the challenge prize and topic. We recommend 
the following skill sets: 
○Project management  
○Research 
○Consultancy 
○Communications 
●Access to funding or an idea of where you might get funding from for running the 
challenge prize, including incentives and prizes  
 
If you don’t have a specific idea, but can see the value of driving health data 
innovation, ​it is important to identify the range of potential problems and verify them 
with a wide community of experts and stakeholders. This requires an initial phase of 
scoping and discussion through workshops, interviews and desk research with health 
practitioners, researchers, data scientists, policy makers, communities, patients and 
carers from the region you are looking to run the health data challenge prize in.  
How to use this framework 
We hope this playbook will give you: 
-an understanding of how to identify your challenge topic and problem 
-tools and guidance on how to understand the data landscape and build a model 
which enables you to best leverage data to support your challenge prize.  
 
Tip: Expect to deliberate and iterate  
It may seem like there’s a lot to do before starting to think about the prize, but investing 
time in understanding the context of your challenge will enable you to improve its design, 
which will make it more impactful. 
 
It is likely that in the initial scoping phase your challenge prize idea will change. As you 
carry out deeper enquiries into your prize area, you may shift and refine the focus of your 
May 2020 

 
prize. This is to be expected. Sometimes you will need to investigate a different aspect of 
the problem or opportunity. Sometimes you might need to redraft your aims because 
new insights emerge about the opportunities and constraints around the challenge. You 
might also find the conditions are not right for a prize. See this work as iterative and plan 
a series of events and activities (roundtables, workshops or focus groups) that help you 
to test your early thinking with different people.  
  
May 2020 

 
Section one: Identify 
your data challenge 
prize topic and problem 
 
Every successful data challenge prize starts with a well-defined problem. There are many 
problems that need to be addressed in healthcare. However, not all of them will be 
effectively addressed through the use of a challenge prize. Challenge prizes resolve some 
of the barriers to innovation by offering an incentive to a broad range of people to 
produce innovative solutions. However, sometimes a lack of innovation might not be the 
key issue.  
 
In this section, we outline: 
 
●Some criteria that you can check your idea against, to see if it is suitable for a 
health data challenge prize. 
●How to write a problem statement to articulate your challenge in a single 
statement. You can then use this to continually refer to, and revise, as you scope 
the problem out. 
Characteristics of health data challenge prize problems 
Following are some characteristics of the types of problems that are most suitable for a 
health data challenge prize (this might not always be the best approach – you can find 
out about different types of innovation methods in the ​Nesta Challenge Prizes Guide​). 
 
1.Direct societal relevance 
A good health challenge prize problem needs to attract a wide pool of potential 
innovators. It therefore needs to have wide societal relevance so that different 
practitioners from different disciplines will understand the problem and be 
motivated to try and contribute to solving it.  
 
Health challenge prize problems need to be big enough to attract participants 
who can think about the project differently and bring different approaches and 
techniques to the solutions. However, make sure that it is not so big that you 
won’t be able to clearly describe and measure the impact of your challenge 
prize.  
 
2.Can be addressed through the use of data  
A good health challenge prize problem will focus on addressing an existing 
health problem through the use of data in a new way. This could mean using 
new techniques in processing and using health data, or combining health data 
with other less traditional data sources. 
 
The topic area and region you are running it in therefore needs to have at least 
some data available on the problem area and a technical and regulatory data 
May 2020 

 
infrastructure to enable access to that data by challenge participants. Health 
data is highly sensitive, so access is often restricted and subject to rigorous 
governance. You will need to be able to work with data stewards to enable 
access or the creation of synthetic data to support participants. 
 
3.Measurable solutions 
The health challenge prize problem needs to have a solution that is measurable 
and that enables you to set time-bound targets to measure the progress you’re 
making. In order to demonstrate the value of these types of activities, you need 
to have something to show at the end of the prize which interests other funders 
and partners to invest and galvanise further work on the projects.  
 
4.Problems need to have coordinated efforts around them 
Some problems will have lots of people working away at them from different 
angles and perspectives. This is great in some ways as it means there is clearly 
a problem to be solved, but it might also mean that efforts aren’t as coordinated 
or progress can’t be made as quickly as it could if people worked together. 
 
Running a challenge prize allows you to invite lots of different people to apply 
and provides an opportunity to bring different skill sets together.  
 
 
You may have a specific challenge topic in mind.​ If so, consider your challenge 
topic in the light of the criteria above. It is likely that you will not have a full picture of the 
above as yet. The next steps in the playbook will help you to add more detail and to 
sense-check whether the problem is the right one to focus on.  
Challenge statement  
It is a good idea to articulate the challenge in a single statement that can then be 
reviewed regularly throughout the process. For example:  
 
“​In England, 1 in 6 people report experiencing a common mental health problem (such as 
anxiety and depression) in any given week. But current interventions for anxiety and 
depression are only 50% effective. This challenge seeks to support solutions that use 
data and artificial intelligence to improve the efficacy of mental health interventions, 
approaches and techniques.​” 
 
The statement must describe the problem and how big it is, and then what the challenge 
prize is going to do to solve it without predetermining what solutions will look like. It is 
also good to include some statistics where possible, what current interventions there are 
(if any) and to make sure it is broad enough to iterate on as you go further through the 
scoping process. 
  
May 2020 

 
Section two: Understand 
the data landscape 
What? ​A data landscape review is the process of mapping out the key data and 
data-related resources that exist in a specific sector or domain. These include 
datasets, publishers, publishing outlets and tools. 
 
Why?​ A data landscape exercise can help to identify the range of datasets being 
used to help solve challenges, to highlight the role that specific datasets have in 
addressing multiple challenges, with a view to later ensuring they are as open as 
possible. Ultimately, this helps you identify how much data is actually available to 
work with and if a data challenge for this topic is feasible.  
 
Outputs: ​You can expect to create some of the following outputs from a data 
landscape review: 
 
●A list of key stakeholders and their capacities. 
●An overview summary of the legal, regulatory and cultural 
context.  
●A data inventory of key datasets. 
●A ​data ecosystem map​. This will show the data and value flows 
in the challenge area and help identify the informational gap in 
enabling decision-makers at different levels to make better 
decisions.  
 
 
 
We suggest the following activities to create an initial data landscape review:  
●Research a significant body of work on the topic and pull together the key 
definitions, figures and issues within the field.  
●Speak to experts and practitioners you have identified to verify and add detail to 
your desk research. 
●Review the legal, regulatory and policy context of the topic. 
●Map the stakeholders, data flows and value flows. 
●Make an inventory of the available data which you can use in your health data 
challenge, and assess its accessibility for participants. 
 
Tip: Sequence of activities 
You do not need to complete each activity before starting the next, but activities such as 
literature reviews and interviews can make creating stakeholder maps and data 
inventories much easier.  
 
 
May 2020 

 
Undertake desk research on the challenge topic area 
Why? ​It is important to clearly articulate the idea you have for the challenge topic. 
With desk research, you will be able to: 
 
●understand and analyse the latest information on the topic and challenges 
related to it 
●identify any previous or ongoing initiatives to draw from, or any initiative 
that will cover, or has already covered, what you had in mind 
●start identifying key stakeholders to interview (we recommend 
interviewing stakeholders in parallel to undertaking desk research – see 
next section) 
●start identifying key data sources. 
 
Output: ​A document with a list of key reference papers and summary notes 
  
Start by reading the key research and relevant white papers and reports you can find 
online which discuss the topic. In order to find such information, you might want to start 
with: 
●general web searches  
●reports and evidence from patient and civil society groups 
●academic literature in the relevant domain to look for datasets being published 
or cited in the literature.  
 
It is advised that you do this even if you know the area very well, as you want to ensure 
research papers are as up to date as possible and relevant to the region you are thinking 
of running the prize in. The key things to look out for are:  
 
-evidence of the scale of the problem (for example, “existing treatment in this area 
is only 50% effective”) 
-key terms and definitions  
-evidence and key blockers to why this problem isn’t already being solved 
through traditional research and healthcare practices 
-key stakeholders and experts in the field. 
 
Once you have completed this review, reflect on the information you have gathered and 
try to revise the statement you had for the challenge.  
 
Tip: Staying up to date 
Research papers are published all the time, and it can be hard to stay informed of the 
latest findings. After gathering sufficient evidence, scale back active desk research, and 
use automated updates and subscriptions to ensure you stay well informed. 
List, interview and map your stakeholders 
Why? ​This will help you identify who you need to speak to in order to: 
●draw from existing expertise 
●make sure your challenge prize matches a specific need  
●understand which stakeholders might play what roles 
●prioritise who to speak to first.  
 
May 2020 

 
Outputs: ​A stakeholder map, interview transcripts and landscaping materials 
 
 
Identify your stakeholders  
 
Supplementing desk research with external engagement is a vital part of the scoping 
exercise. Drawing on the stakeholders you have come across in your desk research, 
identify around five key individuals to invite for interviews, as a starting point. It is likely 
that those initial stakeholders will provide you with more contacts to speak to. We 
recommend interviewing stakeholders in parallel to conducting a literature review. 
 
Questions that might help you to identify key stakeholders are: 
 
●Who are the people affected by the problem? 
●Who are the people already doing work on the topic/problem? 
●Who are the people and organisations who might respond to the challenge?  
●Who might have relevant data?  
●Who are the decision makers?  
●Who are the policy makers and regulators involved?  
●Which civil society organisations or funders might get involved? 
 
Once you have your initial list of stakeholders, make sure you understand their potential 
interest and capacity to take an active role in the challenge. Identify two groups of 
stakeholders: 
 
●Group 1: those that can help you understand the problem area (healthcare 
providers, data aggregators, patients, patient groups, support groups and 
organisations, public bodies, non-governmental organisations). 
●Group 2: those that might be involved in the challenge (data scientists, clinicians, 
policy makers, social scientists, behaviour change experts, communicators, 
potential funders and partners).  
 
Ensure you are speaking to representatives from both groups of stakeholders. Focusing 
on one group over another might lead to poor problem definition or a challenge design 
that does not support innovators. 
 
Define a set of questions 
 
For Group 1, questions might include: 
 
●How would you describe the problem in this specific country or area? 
●Have there been or are there ongoing initiatives related to solving this problem? 
 
For Group 2, questions might include:  
 
●Would there be appetite from a community to take part in such a challenge? 
●What barriers might prevent you from participating? 
●What kind of role do you see yourself/your organisation playing in the challenge? 
●Could some people in your team/organisation set aside some time to help? 
●If relevant​ - what kind of data produced by your organisation could be used for 
the challenge? 
May 2020 

 
 
You can also use some additional suggestions in Annex 3 (potential interview guide 
questions). 
 
 
Run interviews and snowball through additional interviews 
 
The aim of these interviews is to verify, challenge, refine and expand on the information 
you have drawn together through desk research or direct further research. Use the 
material you have already gathered as a prompt to ask for more detail, to fill in gaps and 
to ​hear alternative perspectives​. The idea is to ask others for suggestions for datasets, 
suggestions of other stakeholders to engage with, and to help identify regulatory barriers. 
The interviews can be conducted online, over the phone or face to face.  
 
It is useful to use a standard set of questions (an interview guide) so you can compare 
responses more effectively and ensure that the same general areas of information are 
collected from each interviewee; this provides more focus than the conversational 
approach, but still allows a degree of freedom and adaptability in getting information from 
the interviewee.  
 
Tip: Plan ahead  
Looking ahead, you’ll need to invite several key actors for interviews and 
workshops. These can take time to arrange. For a workshop we recommend 
giving invitees three weeks notice. Therefore, set a date for your workshop and 
time slots for interviews early on. As soon as you come across key figures, 
consider getting in touch to organise an interview or invite them to a workshop. If 
you are working in a new region, we would also recommend working with local 
partners to help with engagement and organisation. 
 
 
Create an ecosystem map 
Once you’ve started to engage with your stakeholders, we recommend you create a 
data ecosystem map​. A data ecosystem consists of the organisations, communities and 
people that create and benefit from the value created by the data flowing through our 
data infrastructure. A data ecosystem map illustrates the value exchanges in an 
ecosystem. 
 
This can be used both as a practical planning tool to manage your data ecosystem, and 
for communication and advocacy to demonstrate the opportunities for increasing value 
to particular parts of the ecosystem.  
 
Place your challenge prize in the centre of your ecosystem. Draw on your list of 
stakeholders, the legal and regulatory review and the data inventory to identify and draw 
connections between the actors. Map the relationships and flows of value exchanged 
between them. This will help you identify roles, existing capacity and potential funding 
solutions.  
 
1)Map the data  
Start by mapping the data stewards that you think are most relevant to your 
challenge. Then add in the specific types of data they hold. Consider the 
following for each type of data held by the data steward:  
 
-Is data at a patient level or at an aggregated level? 
May 2020 

 
-What are the data access mechanisms required for that data? 
-Are there data intermediaries who facilitate that access?  
-Are there technologies used by data stewards that are relevant to the 
challenge? 
 
2)Add your participants 
Who is going to take part in the challenge prize? Are they startups, researchers, 
medical service providers, pharmaceutical companies, academic organisations, 
patient groups etc? Make sure you include those who will be involved in the 
prize even if they’re not directly competing, such as individuals and organisations 
providing mentorship and judging.  
 
3)Add your beneficiaries and think through the value chain  
Who will benefit from the outputs produced through the prize? There may be 
several groups of beneficiaries. Think through the relationships between the 
beneficiaries and the order in which the different groups might gain value from 
the outputs of your challenge. For example, the outcomes of a challenge that 
primarily aims to enable better predictions of outbreaks and epidemics is likely to 
initially benefit global health organisations such as the WHO or aid organisations, 
who will be able to better target their efforts, which will in turn benefit patients 
and the public.  
 
4)Add any other organisations such as funders and regulators 
Are there any existing/potential funders in this challenge topic? Review your list 
of regulatory and statutory bodies. Which ones are most relevant to your 
challenge? Add them to the map and think though how you will need to work 
with them on the challenge 
 
5)Sensitivities and blockers  
Consider what might be the most sensitive relationships related to the topic and 
the conditions which could put those subject to the sensitivities at risk, for 
example insurance providers, local communities and different types of ‘personal 
relationships’. Sensitivities will be different depending on the topic you are 
working on and the community you are working with. An example might be the 
relationship between carers and people with disabilities.  
 
6)Opportunities  
What role is your challenge prize playing in this ecosystem? What does the 
ecosystem map show you about the considerations you need to build into the 
prize so it has the greatest impact? Consider mapping the tools that may be 
created that provide services from the challenge participants to the beneficiaries. 
 
 
Following is an example ecosystem map for a challenge project around 
reducing snakebite mortality and morbidity in India: 
 
May 2020 

 
 
 
Develop your theory of change and evaluation structure  
What? ​A theory of change is a tool that helps you better understand the 
complexity of the change you wish to see and imagine solutions. Through the 
creation of a theory of change you can: 
 
-plan specific strategies to solve a problem 
-gather evidence of success and failure 
-demonstrate contribution to impact. 
 
Why?​ A ​theory of change​ is key to​ ​help structure your thinking throughout the 
scoping and design process.  
 
Output: ​A theory of change table or diagram 
 
Creating a theory of change will help you describe the problem you are trying to solve, 
and illustrate how and why the challenge prize is expected to bring about the desired 
change in the given context. 
A theory of change creation exercise, such as the one described in Nesta’s ​DIY Learn 
Module​, can help you to articulate the impact you expect to achieve through addressing 
a specific health challenge, and how that impact will be achieved through the planned 
challenge prize activities, outputs and outcomes​ ​– the intended pathway to change.  
 
According to ​Ideas to Impact​ – an action-research programme designing, implementing 
and testing innovation prizes to induce innovative solutions to development challenges in 
climate change adaptation, energy access and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) – a 
theory of change “enables prize teams to articulate assumptions and risks, to navigate 
the complexity that accompanies innovation prizes, and to inform decisions during 
launch and implementation”.  
 
May 2020 

 
It helps to describe the steps by which you plan to achieve your goal, and the risks and 
assumptions – opinions or beliefs about how and why change happens – you’re making 
with each of those steps. Throughout the implementation of the challenge, it will help you 
to see whether your work is contributing towards achieving the impact you want to have, 
and if there are other things that you need to consider as well.  
 
If your challenge consists of a number of different streams with different outputs,​ ​a theory 
of change can help to plan the contributions of the individual streams towards the shared 
goals of the challenge.  
 
It is important that your theory of change is designed through a collaborative and 
consultative process. This ensures that it is informed by a broad set of perspectives and 
that stakeholders are more engaged because they own the process and all the 
subsequent activities.  
 
Tip: An iterative theory of change 
You might want to prepare a draft theory of change as you start to get a clear 
understanding of the impact you’d like to achieve and how the challenge prize can 
facilitate that and share this draft with key stakeholders for their input. It should then be 
further refined through the scoping and design of the challenge.  
 
Key components of a theory of change 
 
1)Overall goal/expected impact of a health data challenge prize 
To define the overall goal, it might help to define the root cause and 
consequences of the problem or need identified, and the future you wish to 
bring about. For instance, you might design a challenge prize to reduce 
snakebite mortality and morbidity in a given country.  
 
Once you identify the expected impact, it is helpful to think about what needs to 
happen to make it a reality, ie what are potential solutions/ways to address the 
problem? This will help you define the medium-term effects of your work 
(outcomes), immediate, tangible effects (outputs), and the concrete steps to be 
carried out (activities), as listed below. 
 
2)Outcomes from a health data challenge prize 
Following through the example of a challenge that aims to reduce mortality and 
morbidity due to snakebites, your expected outcomes might be around 
healthcare providers, policymakers and civil society making better informed 
decisions about prioritising preventive activities and resource allocation across 
healthcare facilities for snakebite response.  
 
 
3)Outputs from a health data challenge prize 
Using this same example, the immediate, tangible outputs would likely be tools 
and applications that help different groups of stakeholders to make better 
decisions, for instance a web interface that allows health policymakers to see the 
anticipated effects of climate change on predicted snakebite instances and 
allows them to establish priority regions for snakebite management for the 
coming decade. Similarly, a web-based tool that helps hospitals estimate the 
right quantity of antivenom and intensive care units to order for the year ahead 
might be an output. 
 
May 2020 

 
Another output of the challenge might be an engaged community of innovators 
who are better connected with academia and healthcare, and more likely to 
successfully work on solving health challenges.  
 
4)Activities of a health data challenge prize 
Some of your activities to run a challenge prize might include: 
 
●Draft a call for proposals 
●Promote the challenge prize 
●Review applications and identify frontrunners 
●Provide mentoring and support 
●Support networking activities 
 
 
Proposed template for a theory of change adapted from NESTA’s ​DIY Tool​ on Theory of 
Change: 
 
Who are the key 
stakeholders that 
will need to be 
involved? (Key 
stakeholders) 
What steps are 
needed to bring about 
change? (Activities) 
What are the 
immediate, tangible 
effects of your work? 
(Outputs) 
What is the 
measurable effect of 
your work? 
(Outcomes) 
What are the wider 
benefits of your work/ 
the long-term change 
you’d like to see? 
(Impact) 
 Activity metrics Output metrics Outcome metrics Impact metrics 
 Key assumptions 
  
Key assumptions 
  
Key assumptions 
Key assumptions 
 
Assumptions are external factors not under the direct control of the challenge prize project which are necessary 
for the achievement of intended results. 
 
Metrics or markers of success are the things you can measure to establish if the intended results are being 
achieved. 
 
Think about measures of success 
As you develop your theory of change, identify what your measures of success are. How 
will you know if the challenge has achieved the change you are aiming to make? What 
are the metrics of that change and how will you measure them? It is helpful to define 
metrics at all the different levels of your theory of change, ie for the activities, outputs, 
outcomes and impact.  
 
Taking the previous example, an impact measure for the challenge around snakebite 
would be the mortality and morbidity rates due to snakebite. You would expect to see a 
drop in these numbers over time. Other measures that might be worth tracking would be 
the number of snakebites and snakebite envenoming cases.  
 
An outcome measure for the same challenge could be the extent of the use of products 
and tools created during the challenge to inform decision makers about prioritising 
preventive activities and resourcing the health system for snakebite response. This could 
be tracked through several indicators, eg the number of health facilities that are actively 
May 2020 

 
using the tools developed or plan to roll it out, or the number of NGOs that are validating 
or adjusting their community education activities as a result of using, for instance, 
interactive dashboards developed through the challenge. 
 
Similar to how you identified the activities, outputs, outcomes and impact, you can refine 
the corresponding measures as you build up a better understanding of the change the 
challenge prize is likely to bring about.  
 
Consider the risks 
Consider the risks involved in running this challenge. For example: 
 
●Are there risks which would prevent prize participants from getting involved?  
●Are there any potential reputational risks attached to the challenge topic – data 
protection issues, political tensions, etc? Are there any macro PESTLE factors 
1
that could hinder the challenge topic, or cause it to fail?  
 
Set up a risk register. Example risks are included in ​appendix 3​.  
Review the legal, regulatory and policy context 
Why? ​It will help you identify and understand the local context that impacts 
governance and the use of data in the region you are planning on running the 
challenge programme in. The key question you want to answer here is whether 
the policies and rules around the use of health data, and data more generally, are 
conducive to running a challenge prize. 
 
This will also help you identify if and when you would need to engage with 
regulators, for example.  
 
Output: ​Light review of the legal, regulatory and policy context of your topic area 
and region 
 
 
It is important to start by developing a broad understanding of the legal, regulatory and 
policy context of the region you are looking to work on. For instance, a lack of clarity on 
privacy and data protection regulations can expose data holders to significant 
compliance risks and liabilities. Fragmented legal and regulatory frameworks also create 
uncertainty with the exchange of data across sectors and sovereign borders, should your 
challenge involve non-health data and/or run in multiple countries. 
 
With a better understanding of the legal, regulatory and policy context, you should be in 
a position to make a decision about the feasibility of running a data challenge prize. The 
review should cover: 
 
●Data protection laws and policies 
○the main privacy or data protection laws, policies and regulatory 
authorities that may impact on the access, use or sharing of personal 
data and/or anonymised data between different organisations 
○the privacy or data protection laws and regulations governing the 
access and exchange of data between third parties across sectors 
and/or across borders, including any relevant agreements required  
1
 PESTLE: Political, economic, social, technical, legal, environmental 
May 2020 

 
○the material risks or liabilities data owners could be exposed to under 
the applicable laws for the sharing of data with third parties 
 
●Intellectual property laws 
○whether any intellectual property legislation may be relevant to the use 
of data required for the challenge prize 
○the intellectual property legislation governing the ownership of any 
output and/or deliverables arising from the challenge prize 
○any requisite agreements and approaches to data licensing in the 
country you are looking to run the challenge prize in, including a short 
review of a selection and adoption of government open data licences 
 
●Health data 
○any applicable laws, policies or regulations in the healthcare sector that 
may impact on the access, use or sharing of health data between third 
parties, including but not limited to susceptibility data and 
patient-specific data. 
Make a data inventory  
For more detailed guidance on this, see the ODI’s guide on ​How to create a data 
inventory 
 
Why? ​A data inventory exercise can help to identify the range of datasets that 
could be used for your challenge prize and where you need to engage with 
potential partners to gain access to them. 
 
It will also help you identify datasets you would need to monitor and measure the 
impact of the challenge prize. 
 
Output: ​A table with information on key datasets (see table template below) 
 
 
‘Data inventory’ is a term the ODI has been using to help map out the key data and 
data-related resources that exist in a specific business sector or domain, or addressing a 
problem. These include datasets, data publishers, publishing outlets (eg the data.gov.uk 
website) and tools. 
Tip: ‘Good enough’ data inventories 
Depending on the size of the topic and the amount of data available, it might not be 
possible to create a full data inventory as part of the scoping phase. If this is the case, 
you could focus on creating a high-level data inventory in the short term and expand on 
this in the challenge set-up phase. 
 
Some additional goals can be to: 
 
●assess the quality of the data available  
●have a robust analysis of the sector data 
●easily access relevant data  
●assess the range of data owners in the relevant sector 
●make recommendations to improve open data practice in the sector. 
 
May 2020 

 
To decide on which datasets to look into, you might want to consider: 
 
●what kind of data you are looking for – using a ​matrix of medical data​ might help, 
to identify the types of health and non-health data you are looking for, and to 
prioritise your search 
●country coverage 
●how recent the publications and datasets are 
●the credibility and reliability of the data source 
●the methodological soundness of the data collection approach. 
 
The information you are looking for needs to be data specific and can be captured in a 
spreadsheet format here​. You might want to look into the format(s) the data is in (MS 
Excel, CSV, JSON, SQL DB) and standard being used.  
 
  
May 2020 

 
Section three: Design 
your challenge prize 
Now that you’ve spent some time identifying your problem and scoping it out in more 
detail, you should be in a good position to design a plan for how your challenge prize will 
run. Depending on your funding situation, you might need to put a proposition together 
as part of a bid. 
 
This section describes some of the elements you’ll need to work through in order to have 
a clear plan for how you’ll deliver for your health data challenge prize. You can find an 
example delivery plan on pages 10-11 of the ​Nesta and ODI Open Data Challenge Series 
Handbook​. 
 
1)Set out your phases and sequencing 
 
Your challenge prize will need to be split into different phases. We have outlined 
some common phases in ​appendix one​, but these may vary depending on the 
topic and problem you have selected and where you are running it in. 
 
If you are running a challenge prize that is looking to address more than one 
problem, we would recommend staggering the phases so they aren’t all running 
at the same time. This will allow you to learn and adapt as you go. 
 
2)Estimate your budget 
 
You’ll need at least an estimate for how much the challenge prize programme 
will cost to deliver. You may have a set budget that you need to work within, or 
you may be pitching for funding. 
 
It is important to remember that you’ll need budget for the running of the prize 
(for example project management, financial management, communications and 
branding, legal support) as well as budget for the prize itself. The budget should 
include money for the following aspects (depending on phases involved): 
 
●data acquisition, curation and access control 
●events, eg demo day, judging event and launch lab 
●seed funding 
●training and mentorship 
●communications 
●prize money. 
 
3)Summarise your scoping work in a proposition 
 
We recommend that you summarise your scoping work into a proposition, which 
you may need to do anyway if you are pitching for funding. Even if you already 
have funding confirmed for your challenge prize, it is helpful to have everything 
collated in one place and it allows you to share it with others more easily. In your 
proposition, you should clearly articulate: 
May 2020 

 
 
●why a challenge prize is the right approach for the problem in question 
●what will be achieved through the challenge prize and how  
●where the challenge prize should run 
●who should be involved (participants, decision makers and delivery 
partners) 
●the success indicators 
●the phases and sequencing  
●the budget 
●how the programme will be governed and evaluated  
●key decisions which need to be made before the prize can go ahead  
●a risk register 
●a communications strategy. 
 
You can find out more about how to run a challenge prize in the ‘Deliver’ section 
of the ​Nesta Challenge Prizes Guide​. 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2020 

 
Appendix 1: Main phases 
of work in a challenge 
prize 
 
This is a framework you can use to think about different phases within your challenge 
prize, but there are other approaches and delivery patterns which may be more 
appropriate. You can find out more about these in the ​Nesta Challenge Prizes Guide​. 
 
 
Set up and recruitment 
 
●Convene end-users and stakeholders across the communities in question, 
including local, state and national government and private sector, in order to 
verify their needs with regard to the topic 
●Establish agreements with local delivery partners, and develop the detailed 
delivery plan.  
●Establish agreements with data providers.  
●All data will need to be vetted and cleaned thoroughly prior to launch in order to 
verify quality and limitations. This will take dedicated resources and be the most 
time consuming part. The aim is to ensure that participants can use the data as 
soon as they enter the model development phase. 
●A website will need to be established with all the required information on the 
topic and processes. This should then be publicised to the target audiences. 
Expressions of interest (EOIs) can be open to those who have predefined ideas 
and projects, and those who may have relevant skills but no project proposal.  
 
Launch and applications 
 
●Organise a ‘lab’ or multi-day event and invite all those who have completed 
EOIs, along with beneficiaries, data providers and delivery partners. 
○The event should focus on why the challenge topic is so important, how 
the problem needs to be addressed and the processes involved in 
participating in the challenge prize. This should be recorded and sent to 
people who can’t attend.  
○Participants should have the opportunity to share their project ideas, 
recruit new team members and engage with data providers and 
stakeholders. 
●The teams should then be given a set period of time to confirm their teams and 
submit their area of interest/initial proposal in the formal application. This will 
then be assessed by the judging team based on predefined criteria.  
 
 
 
Model development phase and demo day 
 
May 2020 

 
●Teams should be encouraged to focus on engaging with the available data and 
modelling it to develop insights.  
●They should receive some seed funding (if required), data access support to help 
them identify the specific datasets they need for their project and any 
governance requirements. 
●Through the development of models and insights, the teams will be asked to put 
together plans for developing applications and tools, drawing on the data 
science methods and insights they have developed in this phase. 
●Organise a demo day where participants can showcase the models and insights 
they have developed using the data and give their pitches for tool development. 
They should be judged by a panel of key stakeholders and experts in the field 
against a set of publicly accessible scoring criteria. 
 
Tool development phase and prize 
 
●The projects that have progressed from the model development phase will 
receive further seed funding (if required) to develop the tool or application 
outlined in the model development phase. 
●Teams should have a greater focus on digital development, working with and 
drawing on the expertise of the scientific experts and stakeholders to inform their 
work. 
●Teams should have an opportunity to implement their full or partial solutions in 
an environment with real stakeholders. 
●Organise a public demo day and invite senior stakeholders and media 
representatives. Each of the teams should present their work and explain how 
they have used data science to address the problem. A set of judges should 
review the submissions and the most successful one be awarded a cash prize. 
 
Sustainability 
 
●A sustainability period should follow the award of the prize, in order to support 
the winning project and the other projects to be adopted by the key stakeholders 
and used to address the key issues. If possible, some additional funding should 
be made available for sustainability for the top three prize submissions.  
 
Communications and evaluation 
 
●Stories about the prize should be told through different media channels, and the 
impact and success should be evaluated. 
 
  
May 2020 

 
Appendix 2: Examples of 
relevant data sets 
In the ​matrix of medical data​ you will find some examples of datasets to be looking for.  
 
Below you will find examples of how these datasets can be helpful in solving 
health-related issues such as access to healthcare, improving the quality of healthcare or 
preventing the spread of a disease.  
 
Extending access to healthcare 
 
-Citizens can locate and use the nearest healthcare providers using tools such as 
Farmacias de Turno Chile (Chile), MOH iHealth SG (Singapore), Health Facilities 
(Ghana) and Onde ser Atendido (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). 
-Citizens are able to make choices between healthcare providers based on 
quality, which may encourage the use of healthcare facilities, by using tools such 
as Temporada De Passes (Uruguay) and Find the Best Hospital (UK). 
-Citizens are better able to understand illnesses and treatments, allowing them to 
make informed decisions about seeking appropriate medication and care, when 
using tools such as MedAfrica (Africa), InfoVacunas (Chile) and Iodine (USA). 
-Medical practitioners are able to locate patients faster using the outputs of 
mapping projects such as Humanitarian Openstreetmap Team and MSF Missing 
Map Project. 
-Citizens and policymakers can be made aware of forecasted and current 
extreme weather events, which may increase their ability to identify, plan and 
implement measures to mitigate the effects of these on health. 
-Policymakers may identify and plan health care interventions and prevention 
measures using tools which relate levels and sources of pollution to incidences 
of disease and illness. 
 
Improving the quality of healthcare provision 
 
-Citizens are able to locate the most relevant healthcare provider and service, 
encouraging the efficient and effective use of healthcare resources, using tools 
such as Farmacias de Turno Chile (Chile), MOH iHealth SG (Singapore), Health 
Facilities ​(Ghana) and Onde ser Atendido (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). 
-Citizens are able to identify and challenge providers to increase the quality of 
healthcare provision using tools such as Temporada De Passes (Uruguay). 
Medical practitioners are able to provide efficient and effective care using 
easy-to-access medical and clinical reference information via tools such as 
Health eVillages (Worldwide) and AMREF mHealth (Africa). 
-Citizens and policymakers are able to compare the level of investment and 
outcomes of regional healthcare systems, informing the future distribution of 
funds or the need for greater efficiency, using tools such as healthcare spending 
visualisations in Kenya. 
 
Preventing the spread of disease 
 
May 2020 

 
-Citizens are able to better understand the spread of disease, the best preventive 
measures, symptoms and when to seek care using tools such as MedAfrica 
(Africa) and InfoVacunas (Chile). 
-Responses to disease and illness from governmental, third sector and 
intergovernmental actors can be coordinated and targeted using platforms such 
as Healthmap (Worldwide) and Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) (Worldwide). 
-Intergovernmental and non-governmental actors are able to respond more 
rapidly to outbreaks using the outputs of mapping projects such as 
Humanitarian Openstreetmap Team (Worldwide) and the MSF Missing Map 
Project (Worldwide). 
-Researchers are able to develop computer models to better understand disease 
patterns, which can inform governments and third parties of where and how 
disease will spread, to improve resource allocation and preventative measures in 
projects such as QWeCI (Africa). 
 
 
 
 
  
May 2020 

 
Appendix 3: Additional 
resources 
 
Examples and resources for theories of change 
Some key resources around theory of change creation include:  
 
-Challenge programme or innovation prize specific resources: 
-NESTA’s ​DIY Learn Module​ and ​DIY Tool​ on Theory of Change 
-Other resources: 
-Keystone Accountability’s guide to ​Developing a Theory of Change 
 
 
Here is a sample theory of change for a challenge project around reducing 
snakebite mortality and morbidity in India: 
 
 
Key 
stakeholders 
Challenge prize activities Outputs Outcomes 
Data scientists 
(tech 
community) 
 
Health 
community 
 
Patients 
 
General public  
Build multidisciplinary 
partnerships with universities, 
NGOs and other relevant 
institutions in designing and 
running the challenge  
 
Identify and enable data 
access opportunities  
 
Promote the challenge and 
engage with challenge 
participants  
 
Provide seed funding 
  
Engage with 'end user' groups 
(patients/ clinicians/ healthcare 
providers/ researchers/ 
citizens) in order to inform/ 
co-produce the prize entries  
 
Judge entries and give prize  
 
Provide mentoring  
 
Snakebite data innovation 
minimum viable products 
(MVPs) are developed that 
draw insights on the risk of 
snakebite, envenoming, and 
mortality and morbidity in 
order to develop products and 
tools that help: 
●Hospitals and other 
healthcare providers 
better plan and 
manage the 
resources needed to 
respond to snakebite 
instances (antivenom 
and other supplies 
and equipment (eg 
intensive care 
facilities), trained 
clinicians, etc.) 
●NGOs and other 
stakeholders better 
target snakebite 
prevention activities, 
e.g. community 
Short-term: Clear 
plans and/or 
partnerships 
established to 
implement and/or 
sustain snakebite 
data innovations 
beyond the duration 
of the award 
 
Mid-term: Products 
and tools created 
during the challenge 
are used to inform 
decision-makers 
about prioritising 
preventive activities 
and resourcing the 
health system for 
snakebite response 
in Tamil Nadu 
May 2020 

 
Provide sustainability support 
for entrants  
 
Strengthen the community of 
data scientists working on the 
challenge and beyond through 
peer network support 
education 
interventions 
●Health policymakers 
carry out more 
informed long-term 
planning for snakebite 
management 
requirements in the 
region 
Networks/relationships across 
tech, academia and 
healthcare are established or 
reinforced to improve the 
preparation and response to 
snakebite instances in a 
sustainable manner 
Impact 
Snakebite mortality 
and morbidity is 
reduced in India 
 Assumptions  
(external factors not under the 
direct control of the project 
which are necessary for the 
achievement of intended 
results) 
Assumptions Assumptions 
Key stakeholders such as the 
state department of health in 
Tamil Nadu shares data with 
us 
 
Challenge participants provide 
high-quality submissions 
Hospitals and other 
healthcare providers, and 
policy-makers prioritise the 
implementation of efforts, 
such as the use of 
applications and tools 
developed through this 
challenge prize, to better plan 
for snakebite response 
Snakebite data 
innovations are 
continuously 
reviewed and 
adapted to changing 
circumstances 
Stakeholders across tech, 
academia and healthcare are 
able to commit sufficient time 
to collaborate 
There is enough interest in 
funding or maintaining the 
snakebite data innovations 
beyond the duration of the 
award 
 
 
 
May 2020 

 
 
Potential interview guide questions 
The following can be used as the basis for an interview guide. Use these questions as 
core prompts and add any other questions specific to the challenge, region or type of 
stakeholder you are interviewing: 
 
Suggested questions for the interview guide:  
 
●How open is the sector? 
●Are there any challenges related to health data sharing in the sector/ country? 
●Does your organisation hold health or health-related data? 
●How is this data being accessed, used and shared? 
●Who are the reusers of such datasets? 
●Does your organisation rely on access to health data? If so, where and how do 
you access it? 
●Are there already solutions to this challenge available  that we haven’t come 
across?  
●Who else should we be speaking to? 
●How do you interact with other organisations in the field on this topic? Do you 
share data?  
 
Example risk table 
 
Risk  
statement 
Impact 
statement 
Impact 
Range 
1-5, 5 
being 
highest 
impact 
Likelihood 
Range 
1-5, 5 
being 
highest 
likelihood 
Overall 
Impact x 
Likelihood 
= result 
for focus 
Max score 
= 25 
10-20 = 
Amber 
21-25 = 
Red 
Mitigation 
There will not be 
sufficient access 
to data  
The 
participants of 
the challenge 
will not be able 
to develop 
appropriate 
solutions  5 ? ? 
The selected 
challenge must 
identify data 
stewards to 
partner with prior 
to launching the 
prize.  
Data will be 
misused by 
participants  
This would 
undermine the 
integrity of the 
prize and the 
development 
of public trust, 
limiting the 
impact of the 5 ? ? 
Ensure data 
monitoring of 
data use.  
May 2020 

 
prize and 
damaging 
reputations of 
those running 
the prize.  
Data will not be 
accessible by 
different members 
of a team who are 
in different 
countries 
This would 
restrict the 
ability for 
remote teams 
to collaborate.  3    
IP issues are not 
addressed      
The prize does not 
deliver effective 
solutions       
 
 
Data ecosystem roles to consider when mapping: 
Taken from ​roles​ in The ODI’s Data Ecosystem Mapping methodology 
●Data stewards: Who is responsible for collecting, managing or ensuring access 
to a dataset?  
●Beneficiaries: People or organisations that benefit from the data ecosystem 
because it enables them to make decisions (such as practitioners, patients 
groups etc). 
●Contributors: The people who contribute to the dataset, either knowingly or 
unknowingly through use of a service.  
●Intermediaries: What services add value to a dataset? Are there groups that 
aggregate data in the ecosystem (such as charities)? 
●Creators (or data users): Who uses the data to create things? These could be 
products, services, analyses, insights, stories or visualisations (such as 
innovators, academics, data scientists). 
●Regulators: Those who create and enforce regulatory frameworks.  
●Policymakers: Those who create policies, principles and measures. 
●Reusers. 
●End users. 
●Capacity developers. 
●Technology providers. 
 
May 2020 