

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   2 

 
 
Contents 
Executive summary5 
Introduction7 
Example data institutions8 
What do we mean by sustainability?11 
A framework for sustainability13 
Actors in the ecosystem14 
Data contributors14 
Data users15 
Case study: HiLo15 
Decision makers16 
Funders16 
Revenue models versus business models16 
Applying the Business Model Canvas to data institutions18 
Funding versus financing19 
Cost structure20 
Case study: ROR21 
Sources of revenue22 
Earned revenue22 
Grants, donations and other non-earned revenue sources24 
Common patterns in data institution sustainability26 
Data institutions use mixed revenue streams26 
Five approaches to financing data institutions26 
Case study: OpenCorporates27 
Revenue models evolve over time28 
Institutions plan for future investments29 
Data institutions develop contingency plans30 
Good governance and community support are critical to sustainability31 
Issues and tensions with achieving sustainability32 
Difficulty in attracting early financing32 
Aligning revenue models with institutional goals33 
The ever-evolving relationship between a data institution and its community36 
Conclusion and recommendations39 
Areas for further research39 
Suggestions for those scoping, designing and running data institutions40 
Methodology42 
Research questions42 
Criteria to select institutions42 
Desk research43 
Interviews43 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and was 
published in April 2020. The lead authors are Leigh Dodds, Diána Szász, Jared 
Robert Keller, Ben Snaith and Sonia Duarte, with contributions from Jack Hardinges 
and Jeni Tennison. 
If you would like to send us feedback, please get in contact with us at 
policy@theodi.org​.  
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   4 

 
Executive summary 
In spring 2019, the Open Data Institute (ODI) published pilot reports concluding that 
data trusts – new organisational structures providing independent stewardship of 
data – could be useful in increasing access to data while retaining trust. Data trusts 
are one example of a broader range of data institutions. 
 
Data institutions are organisations whose purpose involves stewarding data on behalf 
of others, often towards public, educational or charitable aims. For these institutions 
to achieve this purpose, they need to be sustainable. Sustainability will ensure that 
institutions can steward data over the long term, in ways that help to increase the 
value that can be created from that data, while minimising potential harms. 
 
This report is the result of an initial investigation into the sustainability of data 
institutions. We have explored the business and revenue models for a small number 
of existing data institutions. Some are still in the early stages of their lifecycle, while 
others have been in operation for 20 or more years. 
 
We propose a framework for thinking about the sustainability of data institutions that 
involves consideration of three different elements: 
 
●The role that the data institution plays in its data ecosystem, which directly 
impacts the type and source of its revenue; and the underlying costs that the 
institution has to cover. 
●The stage that the data institution is at in its lifecycle, which informs the type 
of revenue it needs to acquire, and how those revenue sources may evolve 
over time as the institution and its ecosystem matures. 
●The business model of the data institution, which informs the choice of 
revenue model that best aligns with its purpose.  
 
We draw on existing work, such as Strategyzer’s Business Model Canvas, developed 
by Alexander Osterwalder, to help explore the differences between business and 
revenue models. 
 
In exploring the potential revenue streams available to data institutions we 
differentiate between earned revenue, which is generated through subscription and 
usage fees attached to delivery of value and services provided by the organisation, 
and non-earned revenue including grants, donations and in-kind contributions. The 
latter tend to provide direct support for the institution’s core mission which provides 
more flexibility around how that revenue may be used. 
 
Our research has identified some broad patterns around how data institutions are 
approaching sustainability.  
 
At an early stage in their lifecycle, data institutions need financing to support the 
process of scoping and launching the institution. This is typically provided through 
grants and other non-earned revenue sources.  
 
Later in their lifecycle they need funding to cover costs of service provision while 
generating sufficient revenue to build reserves to ensure long-term sustainability and 
invest in necessary infrastructure. At this stage institutions use a mixture of earned 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   5 

 
and non-earned revenue. For many institutions this mix evolves over time based on 
the changing needs of the community they support. 
We have identified several issues that data institutions face in achieving sustainability. 
The difficulty in attracting the financing necessary to cover setup costs is a challenge. 
Data institutions are using a mixture of grant funding, incubation and hosting by 
existing organisations to develop to a point where other revenue streams become 
feasible.  
 
Aligning revenue models with their institutional goals is also difficult. Some goals, for 
example, to provide strong governance and protection of data, are at odds with 
revenue streams based on usage of data. Data institutions, funders and other 
stakeholders need to understand the potential range of revenue sources available. 
We have mapped out an initial list of these in this paper – see ​Sources of revenue 
section. 
 
Finally, the challenge of responding to the evolving needs of their community means 
that institutions need to continue to adapt, requiring regular re-evaluation of revenue 
streams, as well as the ability to support ongoing investment rather than a strict 
cost-recovery model. 
 
This project has run in parallel to a related project that has focused on designing 
trustworthy ​data institutions. Both projects have highlighted that trust and sustainability 
1
are deeply connected, requiring strong governance and ongoing community 
engagement. 
 
As exploratory research, this project has also helped to identify areas for further work 
and analysis that we will continue to explore in the year ahead. For example, we plan to 
conduct a more comprehensive review of existing institutions to understand how data 
institutions operating in different sectors, with different goals, have developed their 
revenue models.  
 
We also believe there is a role for additional guidance and tools to help new and existing 
data institutions to plan and evolve their revenue models, as well as recommendations 
for how funders can better support the creation of sustainable data institutions. We will 
develop and test the latter by directly engaging with and supporting a range of new and 
existing institutions. 
 
 
 
  
1
 ​Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Trustworthy data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/trustworthy-data-institutions  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   6 

 
Introduction  
Data stewardship involves collecting, maintaining and sharing data, and, in particular, 
determining who has access to it, for what purpose and to whose benefit. 
How data is stewarded is important, as it affects what it can be used for and how it 
may bring benefit or cause harm. Data institutions are organisations whose purpose 
involves stewarding data on behalf of others, often towards public, educational or 
charitable aims. At the ODI, we have been exploring the role of data institutions in 
increasing access to data. 
Data trusts are one type of data institution. They provide independent, fiduciary 
stewardship of data. With data trusts, one party authorises another to make 
2
decisions about data on their behalf, for the benefit of a wider group of stakeholders. 
The independent person, group or entity stewarding the data takes on a fiduciary 
duty, which is considered the highest level of obligation that one party can owe to 
another. 
Some data institutions will follow a similar pattern, where an organisation, or group of 
organisations, entrusts them to share data with others. Other data institutions will 
play different roles, such as combining or linking data, and providing benchmarks and 
other insights to the contributing organisations. Regardless of the role they play, 
designing data institutions to be sustainable in the long term is vital, both to maximise 
their impact and to provide assurance to the data contributors and users who invest 
time and effort in dealing with them. 
Sustainability can be defined in a number of ways, depending on where and how the 
term is being used. Broadly, we have focused on sustainability as the ability of an 
institution to continue operations so that it can deliver on its purpose. More 
specifically, we have looked at financial sustainability, that is the ability to maintain 
financial capacity over time.  
3
If data institutions are delivering societal value through their activities, it is imperative 
that they continue to do so for as long as possible. In this report, we set out the range 
of revenue models that can be adopted by sustainable data institutions. The revenue 
model adopted by a data institution reflects the choice it has made in order to 
balance benefits, costs and risks. For some data institutions, a commercial or 
profit-driven business model might interfere with the types of value they are trying to 
deliver. For others, a commercial focus might enable them to invest more in, and 
maximise, the value generated from the data they steward.  
Sustainability is often highlighted as a common challenge across the digital 
commons, such as open source projects and open standards. While funding of 
physical infrastructure is well understood but challenging, building a sustainable, 
well-maintained data infrastructure is something that, in many cases, we are still 
learning how to do. In her report ‘Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our 
Digital Infrastructure’, funded by the Ford Foundation, Nadia Eghbal describes how 
4
the digital infrastructure that so many of us rely on every day is often built and 
maintained by communities of volunteers. This, as Michael Brannen from the Ford 
2
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Data trusts in 2020’, ​https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-in-2020/  
3
 Bowman W (2011), ‘Financial Capacity and Sustainability of Ordinary Nonprofits’. 
4
 Ford Foundation (2016), ‘Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure’, 
https://www.fordfoundation.org/work/learning/research-reports/roads-and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behin
d-our-digital-infrastructure/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   7 

 
Foundation explains, leads to “thousands of critical software projects being at risk of 
being undermaintained, and of collapsing as a result”. Nadia Eghbal found that 
5
“while lots of companies and organisations rely on digital infrastructure to build their 
products and services, few of those projects are well funded or supported”. Nadia 
notes the public good nature of digital infrastructure, which results in a lack of 
incentive on behalf of individual companies or organisations to offer financial support. 
To explore this topic, the ODI carried out desk research into how existing institutions 
have become sustainable. This was followed by interviews with representatives from 
a number of data institutions:  
 
●Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA): an official body which 
6
collects, analyses and publishes data about higher education in the United 
Kingdom (UK). HESA collaborates with higher education providers, such as 
universities, to collect and curate higher education data sources. Its products 
are used by researchers and policymakers for transparency, retaining public 
trust and decision making.  
●Research Organization Registry (ROR​): a community-led project working 
7
to produce a unique, open, usable and sustainable identifier for every 
research organisation in the world. 
●HiLo Maritime Risk Management: a not-for-profit joint industry initiative 
8
providing analysis of shipping data to make the industry safer. Shipping 
companies share safety-related data from vessels and HiLo runs it through a 
risk algorithm, and shares insights with the companies.  
●OpenCorporates: the world’s largest open database of information about 
9
companies. All of the data on OpenCorporates comes from primary public 
sources, and is used by individuals, journalists, non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs) and companies.  
●MusicBrainz: a project to create a collaborative database about artists, 
10
songs and albums. Any user can contribute and release the music metadata 
under open licences. 
11
These data institutions are comparatively successful and the lessons from their 
individual journeys towards sustainability are useful. We note, however, that the 
research presented here is limited as we have not sought to understand what makes 
a data institution unsustainable.  
This report presents the results of our initial exploratory research. We hope this 
research will help develop further guidance to support the effective adoption of 
suitable business models by new and existing data institutions, as well as to support 
other actors (including governments, regulators and funders) that aim to fund and 
support them.  
 
 
5
 Ford Foundation (2017), ‘Every day, we rely on digital infrastructure built by volunteers. What happens 
when it fails?’, 
https://www.fordfoundation.org/ideas/equals-change-blog/posts/every-day-we-rely-on-digital-infrastructur
e-built-by-volunteers-what-happens-when-it-fails/  
6
 Higher Education Statistics Agency (n.d.), ​https://www.hesa.ac.uk/  
7
 Research Organization Registry (n.d.), ​https://ror.org/  
8
 HiLo Maritime Risk Management (n.d.), ​https://hilomrm.com/  
9
 OpenCorporates (n.d.), ​https://opencorporates.com/  
10
 MusicBrainz (n.d.), ​https://musicbrainz.org/  
11
 MusicBrainz (n.d.), ‘About: Data License’, ​https://musicbrainz.org/doc/About/Data_License  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   8 

 
Example data 
institutions 
The following table provides some examples of existing data institutions across a 
range of sectors, at different stages of maturity and with a range of legal forms. We 
discuss some of these in more detail later in this report. 
 
Data institution Legal status 
Estab-
lished Current revenue Previous revenue Sector 
HESA Not-for-profit, 
private 
limited 
company 
owned by its 
members, 
operating 
under a 
statutory 
footing 
1993 ●Mandatory 
subscriptions from 
higher education 
providers (~£10m 
annual) 
●Service revenue 
share with a partner 
(less than ~£0.5m 
annual) 
●Grant income 
(around ~£0.5m 
annual) 
●Subscriptions 
from higher 
education 
providers  
●Service revenue 
Higher 
education 
MusicBrainz Operated by 
the 
MetaBrainz 
Foundation, a 
501(c)(3) 
tax-exempt 
non-profit 
corporation 
2000 ●Donations from 
individuals (1% of 
income) 
●Donations from 
Google ($30k annual) 
●Sponsorships 
●Monthly support 
payments for 
commercial use of 
data  
●Privately 
maintained. 
Licence was 
Creative 
Commons 
non-commercial 
licence with 
companies 
paying for use 
Music 
Crossref Not-for-profit 
membership 
organisation, 
a 501(c)(3) 
tax-exempt 
non-profit 
corporation 
2000 ●Membership fees 
●Subscription service 
fees 
●Content (data) 
registration fees 
●Service fees 
●Membership fees 
●Subscription 
service fees 
●Content (data) 
registration fees 
●Service fees 
Research 
UK Biobank Registered 
charity 
2004 ●Grants and core 
funding (total 
~£244m committed 
since establishment) 
●Application and 
administration fees  
●Grants and core 
funding 
Health 
(research) 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   9 

 
OpenCorporates Social 
enterprise 
2010 ●Optional, charged 
bulk data and 
Application 
Programming 
Interface (API) 
access (~75%) 
●Grant funding 
(~25%) 
●Grant funding for 
individual projects 
Business 
information 
OpenActive None 2015 ●Government grant 
●In-kind support 
 Physical activity 
HiLo Private 
company 
2018 ●Subscription fees 
collected from data 
contributors 
●Incubated by 
Shell (2018) 
Maritime 
ROR Project 
hosted by a 
group of 
organisations 
2019 ●In-kind donations 
●Fundraising 
campaign ongoing 
(community 
contributions and 
donations) 
●In-kind donations 
(staff time, 
financial 
resources, seed 
data) 
Research 
Table 1:​ Examples of existing data institutions across a range of sectors, at different stages of maturity and 
with a range of legal forms.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   10 

 
What do we mean by 
sustainability? 
There are various definitions of ‘sustainability’. In general, sustainability means being 
able to exist over the long term.  
A sustainable business is one that has “a positive effect, on the global or local 
environment, community, society, or economy”. Organisational sustainability can 
12
also be broken down into different elements, including strategic, product, personnel 
and financial sustainability. Financial sustainability has been defined, in short, as 
13
“keep the business going”. 
14
The challenges of sustainable funding for shared resources and infrastructure are not 
new. For example, Olson (1965) describes the challenges of finding sustainable 
15
business models for common resources due to the issue of freeloading, whereby 
somebody gains access to, and benefits from, infrastructure, but does not contribute 
to it. 
Our initial research draws significantly on a number of papers about maintaining 
scholarly infrastructures. The infrastructure underpinning online academic research 
has been developing over the last 20 years, through organisations such as Crossref 
16
and ORCID, and more recently through ROR. The process of maintaining this 
17
shared infrastructure is analogous to the idea of a data institution; conclusions from 
the academic sector are relevant to our research here.  
The article ‘Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructures’ sets out five methods for 
18
maintaining sustainability through ensuring capacity and resources: 
1.Time-limited funds are used only for time-limited activities – day-to-day 
operations should be supported by day-to-day sustainable revenue sources.  
2.Goal to generate surplus – it is not enough to merely survive, an organisation 
has to be able to adapt and change. To weather economic, social and 
technological volatility, they need financial resources beyond their immediate 
operating costs.  
3.Goal to create a contingency fund to support operations for 12 months – a 
high priority should be generating a contingency fund that can support a 
complete, orderly wind down (12 months in most cases). This fund should be 
separate from those allocated to covering operating risk and investment in 
development.  
4.Mission-consistent revenue generation – potential revenue sources should be 
considered for consistency with the organisational mission and not run 
counter to the aims of the organisation.  
12
 Wikipedia (2020), ‘Sustainable Business’, ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainable_business 
13
 Free Management Library (n.d.), ‘Organisational Sustainability’, 
https://managementhelp.org/organizationalsustainability/index.htm 
14
 Colbert B, Kurucz E (2007), ‘Three conceptions of triple bottom line business sustainability and the role 
for HRM’, 
https://www.academia.edu/5316345/Three_Conceptions_of_Triple_Bottom_Line_Business_Sustainability_
and_the_Role_for_HRM 
15
 Olson, M (1965), ‘The Logic of Collective Action’, ​http://www.sfu.ca/~poitras/collective-action.PDF 
16
 Crossref (n.d.), https://www.crossref.org/  
17
 ORCID (n.d.), ​https://orcid.org/ 
18
 Bilder G, Lin J, Neylon C (2015), ‘Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructure’, 
https://wiki.lib.sun.ac.za/images/f/f6/2015-principle-for-open-scholary-communication-infrastructures.pdf 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   11 

 
5.Revenue based on services, not data – data related to the running of the 
research enterprise should be community property. Appropriate revenue 
sources might include value-added services, consulting, API Service Level 
Agreements or membership fees. 
The article ‘Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The 
Lessons that Olson can teach us’ states that “focusing purely on financial 
19
sustainability in the absence of considering governance principles and community is 
the wrong approach”. Models for sustainability will “need to change over the lifecycle 
of an infrastructure with the growth (or decline) of the community”.  
This article also highlights that the nature of shared digital infrastructure leads to a 
further issue: institutions and their communities can grow large due to the limited 
amount of friction generated from additional contributors or users. This suggests 
that:​“​Digital resources are not natively excludable; a technical barrier has to be put in 
place.” 
20
Therefore, when we are thinking about the sustainability of data institutions, we are 
looking at three things: 
1.The existence of a sustainable revenue model, underpinned by a mix of 
revenue streams, to ensure the ongoing stewardship of data. 
2.The continued demand for the data from data users and those that ultimately 
use the products and services, analyses and insights they create 
– “infrastructures need to be seen as both sustaining and being sustained by 
the communities that they serve.” 
21
3.Sufficient governance to ensure that the aims of the organisation can be 
delivered in the long term.  
 
  
19
 Neylon C (2017), ‘Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The lessons that Olson 
can teach us’, ​https://kula.uvic.ca/articles/10.5334/kula.7/  
20
 Ibid. 
21
 Ibid. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   12 

 
A framework for 
sustainability 
In the previous section we noted that the sustainability of a data institution is linked to 
the ecosystem that surrounds it and the community that supports it. An ecosystem 
diagram can be a helpful way of understanding the role that aspects such as 
financing, funding and value creation play in the ultimate sustainability of a data 
institution. It can also be useful in clarifying the difference between a data institution’s 
business model and its revenue model.  
 
To that end, ​Figure 1​ below centres on a hypothetical data institution and illustrates 
common sources of revenue available to it, as well as the types of organisations from 
which those sources of revenue often flow. It also illustrates the way that data tends 
to flow within such systems and highlights the flow of insights and other information 
that informs decision making within those systems. It does not illustrate the more 
intangible types of value that the actors shown in the diagram, and the wider 
community, might receive due to the presence of the data institution. 
 
In producing the diagram, we utilised an ODI tool, Data Ecosystem Mapping. The 
22
approach draws on ideas from rich picturing, systems thinking and value network 
23
analysis to generate a visual map of how data is being accessed, used and shared by 
a variety of organisations within an ecosystem.  
24
 
Though data ecosystem mapping can be used to illustrate the ecosystem that exists 
around a single organisation or institution, ​Figure 1​ is not intended to represent a 
real-world data institution or describe a complete ecosystem; rather, it is meant to 
showcase the common actors that appear in such an ecosystem and demonstrate 
the various ​types​ of revenue or value that are available to a typical data institution.  
22
 ​The Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Mapping data ecosystems: methodology’, 
https://theodi.org/article/mapping-data-ecosystems/ 
23
 ​Wikipedia (2019), ‘Rich picture’, ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rich_picture 
24
 ​Wikipedia (2020), ‘Value network analysis’, ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_network_analysis 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   13 

 
 
Figure 1: ​Common actors and flows of value and data related to data institutions 
Actors in the ecosystem  
The ecosystem diagram in ​Figure 1​ is made up of data contributors, the data 
institution, data users, decision makers and funders.  
 
It is important to note that none of these categories are mutually exclusive. An 
organisation may occupy multiple roles within the ecosystem that surrounds a data 
institution and, in doing so, may contribute to the sustainability of a data institution in 
multiple ways. ​Microsoft and AOL​, for instance, have in the past simultaneously 
funded the open source map, OpenStreetMap; contributed datasets to improve its 
accuracy; and used the platform in some of its commercial services.  
25
 
Throughout this report, we also refer to the actors in the ecosystem that surround a 
data institution as a ‘community’.  
Data contributors 
We define ‘data contributors’ as people or organisations who contribute to, or help 
curate, a dataset. They may do so explicitly, using tools and frameworks provided by 
a data steward, or they may do so as a by-product of using a service.  
 
In the context of HiLo, for instance, the data contributors are the shipping companies 
that have joined the venture and agree to share accident and safety data about their 
operations with HiLo each month. Whereas for the MusicBrainz project, the 
contributors are the members of the volunteer community who commit to adding 
25
 OpenStreetMap (2010), ‘OpenStreetMap Gets Noticed by Microsoft, AOL’, 
https://blog.openstreetmap.org/2010/12/08/openstreetmap-gets-noticed-by-microsoft-aol/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   14 

 
information on their favourite artists and their works. In contrast, cancer clinics and 
other organisations that use Flatiron Health’s software to manage their cases and 
workflows permit Flatiron, a healthcare technology and services company in the 
United States, to process data generated by their use of those services to share it for 
vital research. 
Data users 
To the right of the ‘data institution’ in ​Figure 1​ are ‘data users’ – people or 
organisations accessing data stewarded by the data institution and using it to create 
products and services, analyses and insights, or stories and visualisations.  
 
For instance, the ‘statutory customers’ who use data published by HESA to perform 
their statutory or public functions would be classed as data users in Figure 1. 
26
Similarly, members of the scholarly research community who use the research 
organisation identifiers stewarded by ROR to discover and track research outputs 
would be classed as data users. 
 
 
Case study: HiLo 
HiLo Maritime Risk Management became an independent not-for-profit 
company in 2018 as a joint venture between 10 leading maritime companies. 
This followed a period of incubation within Shell Energy.  
The main aim of HiLo is to collect data from ships, run it through a predictive 
risk model and offer insights back to contributors, who are also decision makers 
within HiLo’s data ecosystem. The data includes all internal safety data about 
near misses, unsafe acts or faulty equipment – “things where something has 
gone wrong but hasn’t led to a catastrophic incident”. 
Around 55 companies joined the membership and committed to share data that 
is already collected, to gain collective insight about safety. The data is shared 
from these contributors directly to HiLo once a month – this is usually a manual 
process handled via the HiLo portal, but some companies opt to share via an 
API. 
27
Financially, HiLo currently funds its operations completely from subscription 
fees for its insight service, but hopes to diversify its revenue streams to include 
a more balanced mixture of subscriptions and revenue generated from new 
products and services.  
 
26
 HESA (n.d.), ‘What we do: Statutory customers’, 
https://www.hesa.ac.uk/about/what-we-do/statutory-customers 
27
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Case study: The value of sharing data for benchmarking and insights’, 
https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-for-benchmarking-and-insights/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   15 

 
Decision makers 
In a data ecosystem, the ‘decision makers’ are people or organisations that are able 
to make better decisions informed by the products and services, analyses and 
insights, or stories and visualisations created by data users.  
 
If a data ecosystem were to be drawn for a data institution like OpenCorporates, for 
instance, the journalists, investigators and NGOs that rely on OpenCorporates’ data 
to investigate corruption would be the direct data users, while the decision makers 
would be organisations and members of the public who use their outputs to make 
decisions about how to avoid corrupt organisations. 
 
As with many of the categories in this diagram, the distinction between ‘data users’ 
and ‘decision makers’ can become blurred depending on the ecosystem that 
surrounds a data institution and the functions that a data institution performs. For 
instance, if a shipping company were to receive data from HiLo that required further 
analysis or processing in order to be useful, then that shipping company would be 
considered a data user. If, however, that shipping company were to receive 
ready-to-use, actionable insights from HiLo, then that company would be considered 
a decision maker, since it is in a position to make decisions based on those insights.  
Funders 
In ​Figure 1​, the ‘funders’ do not directly interact with the data institution by 
contributing or using data stewarded by that institution, nor do they directly benefit in 
the same way that the decision makers do. Instead, funders tend to support data 
institutions with the aim of encouraging healthy data ecosystems, pursuing 
philanthropic goals or as part of performing their public function.  
 
UK Biobank, the non-profit charity and long-term research project stewarding health 
data for 500,000 research participants, is supported entirely by revenue drawn from 
large funders like Wellcome and the Medical Research Council.  
Revenue models versus business models 
It is important to distinguish between business models and revenue models. 
An organisation’s business model describes the structure used in order to create, 
deliver, capture and distribute value. Its revenue model, on the other hand, 
28
describes how it generates income. A tool commonly used to describe an 
organisation’s business model is Strategyzer’s Business Model Canvas, developed 
by Alexander Osterwalder.  
29
 
28
 Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y (2010), ‘Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game 
Changers, and Challengers’, 
https://www.wiley.com/en-gb/Business+Model+Generation%3A+A+Handbook+for+Visionaries%2C+Gam
e+Changers%2C+and+Challengers-p-9780470876411  
29
 ​Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘Business Model Canvas’, 
https://www.strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   16 

 
 
 
Figure 2: The Business Model Canvas 
 
Looking at the example ecosystem in ​Figure 1​, we can see some of the varied ways 
an institution might generate revenue from different actors. This might be by earning 
money from selling insights about data, receiving subscription fees, or from grant 
funding. Regardless of the legal form of an organisation, a stable revenue stream is 
essential to its long-term sustainability.  
The types of revenue that data institutions are able to access also depends on the 
company or organisational form that a data institution takes. In the ODI’s experience, 
some data institutions may operate as for-profit companies with a commitment to 
generate profit for shareholders (for example npm.Inc), whereas others may be set 
30
up as not-for-profit (for example HESA) with any excess funds reinvested into their 
mission.  
In this project, our main focus has been on understanding the different revenue 
streams a data institution can use to become financially sustainable. In our analysis, 
we will continue to touch on the sustainability of the wider business model, but this 
warrants further research.  
 
30
 npm, Inc (n.d.), ​https://www.npmjs.com/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   17 

 
Applying the Business Model Canvas to data institutions 
There are often said to be four factors that describe a business model. These four factors, 
31
applied in the table below to the context of a data institution, map onto the building blocks of the 
Business Model Canvas. 
Four factors describing a company’s 
business model 
Four factors describing a data institution’s 
business model 
1. WHO are the target customers (segments, 
relationships)? 
1.WHO are the intended data users and 
those making decisions informed by the 
products and services, analyses and 
insights, or stories and visualisations 
created by them? 
2. WHAT is the benefit that a company 
provides to its customers and most important 
partners in the value chain (value promise or 
value proposition)? 
2.WHAT is the value that a data institution 
provides to its community? This can be 
around creating social or economic value 
or minimising harm.  
3. HOW does the company deliver this benefit 
(partners, activities, resources)? 
3.HOW does the data institution deliver this 
value through its role in the ecosystem? 
Key activities can include, for instance, 
making decisions about who should 
access data on behalf of an organisation 
or group of organisations, combining or 
linking data, and/or providing 
benchmarks and other insights back to 
the organisations that have contributed to 
them.  
4. HOW does the company earn money 
(revenue model or revenue structure)? 
4.HOW does the data institution generate 
revenue? 
Table 2: ​ Four factors that describe a business model, applied to the context of a data institution, mapping onto the 
building blocks of the Business Model Canvas. 
A revenue model, therefore, is just one of the factors to consider when designing the business 
model for a data institution. In this report we are focusing primarily on revenue models. 
 
  
31
 Lead Innovation Blog (2018), ‘Business Model versus Revenue Model’, 
https://www.lead-innovation.com/english-blog/business-model-versus-revenue-model-what-is-the-differen
ce  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   18 

 
 
Funding versus financing 
In our previous project to pilot data trusts, we proposed a simple lifecycle (​Figure 3​) 
32
that described the stages of setting up and running a data institution. 
 
Figure 3: The data institution lifecycle 
 
In this project, our hypothesis has been that at different stages of their lifecycle, data 
institutions will have different costs and revenue models. The financial costs of 
setting up a new data institution differ to the costs of running an established data 
institution. A more mature organisation will also have more sources of revenue 
available to it. As the data institution evolves, so might its revenue model. 
When planning investments to develop physical infrastructure, a distinction is often 
made between financing and funding. Financing refers to covering the upfront costs 
of building infrastructure, while funding refers to paying for the infrastructure over its 
lifecycle.  
33
Figure 4​ highlights the differences between financing and funding, in relation to the 
lifecycle diagram.
 
32
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots’, 
https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/  
33
 Institute for Government (2018), ‘Funding infrastructure’, 
https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/explainers/funding-infrastructure 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   19 

 
 
Figure 4: Financing v funding 
 
This distinction is useful because it highlights the need for early investment to unlock 
longer-term value. Developing a well-defined sustainable revenue model for 
infrastructure, whether physical or digital, is an important part of justifying that early 
investment. 
Until a data institution has launched and is operational, it will have limited options for 
generating revenue from its activities, so it is likely to rely more on other revenue 
streams. Following launch, data institutions will also incur different kinds of costs: to 
cover their operations rather than to design their structure or policies.  
During operation, data institutions need to ensure sufficient revenue not only to cover 
their day-to-day operational costs, but also to cover the costs of future investment in 
the infrastructure and costs to handle iterative change to their business model. In 
addition, data institutions need to be building up reserves to fund a possible 
retirement phase. 
We explore cost structures and sources of revenue in the following sections. 
Cost structure 
The Business Model Canvas describes the cost structure for a business as: “the most 
important costs incurred while operating under a particular business model. Creating 
and delivering value, maintaining customer relationships, and generating revenue all 
incur costs.”  
34
 
Many data institutions will have common infrastructure costs such as data storage, 
staff costs and fixed assets such as office space. But those costs will also vary 
depending on the role(s) that the data institution is taking on within the surrounding 
data ecosystem. The role of the data institution will differ depending on its mission; 
the needs of the ecosystem and community; the number of data contributors and 
users; the number of countries being operated in; and the sensitivity of the data being 
managed.  
35
 
These factors will all have an impact on operational costs. Some data institutions may 
focus their activities on governing access to data provided by data contributors. This 
means that costs of data collection and access may be carried by others. But other 
institutions may be more actively involved across the lifecycle of collecting, 
processing, managing, transforming and managing access to data. These all entail 
additional costs. 
 
Anticipating the scale of costs may be quite challenging and will vary from data 
institution to data institution. For example, the dataset stewarded by ROR is relatively 
static and small, which means that infrastructure costs for providing shared services 
are similarly small. The small size means that it is likely data users will incorporate 
and use data directly in their own systems, which again reduces the type and cost of 
the services that ROR needs to provide. 
34
 Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘How do I use the Cost Structure building block of the Business Model Canvas?’, 
https://strategyzer.uservoice.com/knowledgebase/articles/1194382-how-do-i-use-the-cost-structure-buildi
ng-block-of  
35
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots’, p48, 
https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   20 

 
 
As noted in the previous section, operational costs are not the only costs that need to 
be considered when planning for sustainability. The ‘Full Cost Project’ initiative 
provides a useful categorisation of different types of organisational costs, including: 
36
 
●Total expenses​ – the day-to-day expenses of running an organisation. 
●Reserves​ – savings that mitigate risks for the organisation, for example to 
manage uncertainty around funding streams, or to invest in researching and 
developing new products and services. 
●Change capital​ – to invest in large, periodic change programmes that may 
impact the business model of the organisation, for example as part of an 
evaluation phase in the institutional lifecycle (​Figure 3​). 
●Fixed asset additions​ – to cover purchase of new equipment or other 
assets, for example as part of improving or upgrading physical infrastructure, 
like sensors, to support data collection.  
 
This section has proposed a framework for understanding the various aspects of 
financial sustainability by exploring them through the perspectives of a data 
ecosystem and the lifecycle of an institution. The next section outlines the broad 
patterns we identified through our research. 
 
 
Case study: ROR  
The Research Organization Registry (ROR) is a community-led project that 
started off with 17 organisations coming together around the shared vision of 
creating an open, community-led organisation identifier registry for the 
scholarly research community. Three organisations – Crossref, DataCite and 
ORCID – donated staff time and/or financial resources to the ORG ID Working 
Group to move the initiative forward between 2016 and 2018. 
The working group, set up to develop a plan for the operation and governance 
of the registry, considered a range of possible options, including forming a 
37
new independent organisation – the most costly, but an option that helps 
ensure focus and stakeholder representation; and a hosted model sharing 
operational resources with existing organisations – an option that comes with 
reduced costs but increased risk and legal liability. 
The lead organisations supporting the project decided to launch an initial 
start-up phase, adopting a hosted model. A pilot registry was subsequently 
launched in January 2019, with governance and other community layers to be 
ultimately built around it. As of December 2019, the registry includes identifiers 
and metadata for more than 97,000 research organisations. Operations are 
administered by California Digital Library, Crossref and DataCite, and it is 
advised by a larger steering group. The pilot benefited from a donation of seed 
data from Digital Science’s GRID database. 
The project so far has been entirely funded from donations, including staff 
time, financial resources and seed data. To be able to strengthen its capacity 
36
 Philanthropy CA (2018), ‘Full Cost Project’, 
https://www.philanthropyca.org/full-cost-project?qt-full_cost_project=1#qt-full_cost_project 
37
 Figshare​ (2017), ‘ORG ID WG Governance Principles and Recommendations’, 
https://figshare.com/articles/ORG_ID_WG_Governance_Principles_and_Recommendations/5402002/1  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   21 

 
and develop new features, ROR launched a fundraising campaign in October 
2019 and plans to launch an optional paid service tier from 2022 to recover 
costs. The ambition is to eventually generate 100% of the revenue from the 
optional paid-service tier. The registry’s data will remain open and free for 
anyone to use.  
While strategic decision making about operations and governance is the 
responsibility of ROR’s steering group, the organisation engages a strong 
network of community advisers – publishers, researchers, librarians, funders, 
data analysts and metadata experts from around the world – through regular 
calls. ROR seeks ideas and feedback from the community about the directions 
it is heading, and sees this as central to the growth of the organisation.  
Sources of revenue  
There is a wide range of revenue sources available to data institutions, based on 
drawing income from different actors and their role in the ecosystem they support. 
  
It is helpful to draw a distinction between two main categories: earned revenue 
(revenue earned from key activities of the data institution like the supply of data, 
services or membership fees); and non-earned revenue (grants, donations and other 
funding sources). Distinguishing between these two main sources of revenue can 
help us understand how they align with the goals of a data institution, the actors 
providing that revenue, and the ability to access those sources at different stages in 
the data institution’s lifecycle. 
Earned revenue 
Earned revenue can be desirable for a data institution as it tends to be more stable 
than donations or grant funding, and there is the opportunity for growth. Earned 
revenue streams typically involve a direct value exchange: money is paid in return for 
a service (or other output) to be delivered. This means the data institution has to 
invest in understanding the needs of those who are paying, ensure they can service 
the commercial arrangement, and deliver that value. 
Corporate Finance Institute, for instance, defines four common mechanisms of 
38
generating revenue:  
 
1.Transaction-based revenue​, which they describe as “proceeds from sales 
of goods that are usually one-time customer payments”. 
2.Service revenue​, which are revenues “generated by providing service to 
customers and are calculated based on time”, such as revenue generated 
from things like consulting services. 
3.Project revenue​, which can be understood as revenue “earned through 
one-time projects with existing or new customers”. 
4.Recurring revenue​, which they define as “ongoing payments for continuing 
services or after-sale services to customers”, such as subscription fees; 
38
 Corporate Finance Institute (n.d.), ‘Revenue Streams’, 
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/accounting/revenue-streams/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   22 

 
renting, leasing or lending assets; licensing content to third parties; brokering 
fees; and advertising fees.  
 
The Business Model Canvas lists seven ways of generating revenue: 
3940
 
1.Asset sale: ​This revenue stream derives from selling ownership rights to a 
physical product. 
2.Usage fee: ​This revenue stream is generated by the use of a particular 
service. The more a service is used, the more the customer pays. 
3.Subscription fees:​ This revenue stream is generated by selling continuous 
access to a service. 
4.Lending/renting/leasing: ​This revenue stream is created by temporarily 
granting someone the exclusive right to use a particular asset for a fixed 
period in return for a fee. 
5.Licensing: ​This revenue stream is generated by giving customers permission 
to use protected intellectual property in exchange for licensing fees. 
6.Brokerage fees:​ This revenue stream derives from intermediary services 
performed on behalf of two or more parties. 
7.Advertising:​ This revenue stream results from fees for advertising a particular 
product, service or brand. 
 
Drawing on these categories, the following table maps out a range of revenue 
streams available to data institutions that we have observed through our desk 
research and interviews. We anticipate that there are other revenue streams in use by 
existing data institutions and additional potential revenue sources which we will 
identify and catalogue in our future research. 
 
 
 
Type Actor Revenue stream 
Subscription 
fees  
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Membership fees for access to services, data and other 
direct benefits provided by the institution 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Subscription fees for use of the infrastructure. These fees 
might be optional, or mandated as part of the legal form 
of an institution 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Subscription fees for access to a specific product or 
service that uses the data 
Data contributors, data 
users 
Subscription fees for access to a higher-level service 
level agreement or support arrangement for using the 
infrastructure 
Usage fees Data contributors Fees for depositing, submitting or updating data, via a 
standard API or submission form. Includes registration of 
organisations, content and identifiers for parts, products 
and services into an official register. 
Data contributors Fees for depositing, submitting or updating data, via a 
bespoke method or custom format. Includes registration 
39
 Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘Business Model Canvas’, 
https://www.strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas  
40
 Strategyzer (n.d.), ‘How do I use the Revenue Streams building block of the Business Model Canvas?’, , 
https://strategyzer.uservoice.com/knowledgebase/articles/1194385-how-do-i-use-the-revenue-streams-bu
ilding-block-of  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   23 

 
of organisations, content and identifiers for parts, 
products and services into an official register. 
Data users Fees for accessing and using data via a standard API 
Data users Fees for accessing and using data in bulk 
Data users Fees for accessing and using data in a customised 
format or delivered via a bespoke method 
Data users Fees for more timely access 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Consultancy fees for provision of advice or custom 
analytics using data 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Training fees to advise on use of the data and 
infrastructure 
Licensing Data users Data licensing fees, for example to provide additional 
rights for distribution or to remove need for attribution 
Data users Revenue share in new products and services that use 
data provided by the institution 
Table 3: ​Revenue streams available to data institutions, observed through desk research and interviews by 
the ODI 
Grants, donations and other non-earned revenue sources  
The fact that data institutions are often established to promote particular social, 
charitable or educational aims can open up access to other forms of support, both 
financial and non-financial.  
The costs of running non-profit organisations, charities or social enterprises – legal 
forms that many data institutions take – are most often covered by direct funding 
from governments, philanthropists or other funders. Financial support typically 
includes grants, loans, tax breaks, cash donations and sponsorship. 
In contrast to earned revenue streams, this category may involve fewer direct returns 
of value to the funder, as grants and similar revenue are generally given due to a 
high-level alignment between the funders’ own goals and the mission of the funded 
data institution. However, depending on the flexibility in how grants are awarded and 
what they can be spent on, there may be restrictions on how the data institution can 
spend the money. As an example, the UK government defines seven different types 
of grant funding which vary in how they are awarded and how money can be spent. 
41
Financial support may also come by way of loans or tax breaks. Loans may be an 
option for data institutions who need to cover capital costs or to boost cash flow. 
Governments may give a tax break to: ​“​a particular group of people or type of 
organization, it reduces the amount of tax they have to pay or changes the tax 
system in a way that benefits them. A tax break can greatly reduce a taxpayer's 
liability and provides savings through tax deductions, tax credits, tax exemptions, 
and other incentives.”.  
42
41
 GOV.UK (2017), ‘Government Grants Definitions’, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/654680
/2017-09-27_Grant_Definitions.pdf 
42
 Investopedia (2018), ‘Tax Break Definition’, ​https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/tax-break.asp  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   24 

 
Some data institutions also rely on non-financial support, such as donations of 
goods, and for many, the donation of services or time by volunteers is essential to 
achieving sustainability. These donations-in-kind can be combined with financial 
sources of support when appropriate, but some organisations, such as ROR, are 
supported primarily by non-financial contributions.  
 
The following table lists some non-earned revenue sources for data institutions. 
 
 
Type Actor Revenue stream 
Grants 
 
Funders Grants-in-aid provided as general support for the 
institution in meeting its objectives 
Funders General grants awarded in anticipation of the institution 
using it for a specific agreed purpose, for example, to 
carry out a project or invest in infrastructure 
Loans Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers, 
funders 
Loans to help finance institution during early stages of 
its lifecycle 
Sponsorship 
and cash 
donations 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
One-off or regular cash donations and sponsorship 
Tax breaks Funders (government) Tax breaks to help increase reserves and support 
investment 
In-kind 
donations 
 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Donations of hardware or other physical resources 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Provision of staff time to provide support during setup 
and operations 
Data contributors, data 
users 
Provision of technical infrastructure to support 
operations of the institution, for example hosting of 
services 
Data contributors, data 
users 
Provision of staff time to develop and maintain software 
used by the institution and its ecosystem 
Data contributors, data 
users, decision makers 
Volunteer time to support collection and curation of 
data, community engagement, software development, 
etc 
Table 4: ​Non-earned revenue sources for data institutions 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   25 

 
Common patterns in data 
institution sustainability 
Drawing on our desk research and interviews, we have identified some common 
patterns in how data institutions have been working to achieve sustainability. 
Data institutions use mixed revenue streams 
Through our desk research and interviews, we have seen a range of revenue models 
that data institutions are relying upon at different stages of their lifecycle. These 
include both earned revenue, such as recurring membership and subscription fees 
(HiLo, HESA, OpenCorporates, MusicBrainz), or application fees for researchers (UK 
Biobank), and other models such as grants (OpenCorporates, HESA, HiLo) and 
financial and/or in-kind donations in the form of staff time or seed data (ROR, 
MusicBrainz). Some institutions also earn money from the provision of one-off 
services, for example bespoke consultancy or training (HESA).  
Of the data institutions that we have researched, we noted that they cover their costs 
through a combination of two or three different revenue models, often with one 
dominant revenue source. For instance, HESA generates 90% of its revenue from 
mandatory subscriptions from higher education providers, and OpenCorporates 
generates 75% of its revenue through API subscription fees.  
This mix of revenue models is very diverse and is dependent on the context of the 
data institution, although of the institutions we have reviewed, the majority seem to 
be aiming for more earned revenue over time, with an emphasis on recurring revenue 
streams.  
Five approaches to financing data institutions 
The funding needed by data institutions changes throughout their lifecycle. A data 
institution initially needs financing to afford the upfront costs of setting up a new 
organisation. Activities that take place within the scoping, co-design and launch 
phases of the data institution lifecycle, including but not limited to market research, 
legal fees for incorporation and resources to start organisational activities, will all 
need to be covered financially.  
None of the institutions that we have explored as part of this research were financed 
through venture capital.  
So far we have identified five different approaches to getting a data institution 
started:  
1.Grants to cover scoping, co-design and launch costs  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   26 

 
Some data institutions have benefited from grant funding to help get their project 
off the ground. This funding covers the initial scoping and pilot phase of an 
initiative prior to the establishment of an independent legal entity. 
2.Being incubated by an existing organisation 
HiLo, for instance, was incubated by Shell, and after it demonstrated value, was 
spun out as an independent organisation with the support of a grant from 
Lloyd’s Register Foundation.  
3.Being hosted by a non-profit organisation 
There is also a hosted model, particularly prevalent in the scholarly research 
sector, in which an existing organisation hosts a data institution either for an 
initial start-up phase or on a more permanent basis, committing dedicated staff 
resources and funding to it.  
4.Joint financing by a group of organisations  
ROR is an example of a project hosted by a group of organisations. In its 
documentation, ROR describes this model as beneficial in terms of lower 
start-up costs (no need for separate payroll or finance) with the flexibility to 
expand later and hire staff directly. Other successful institutions in the research 
43
infrastructure field that were financed by other organisations include ORCID 
44
and Crossref.  
45
5.Financing through personal investment  
For several years, OpenCorporates was funded via direct investment from its 
founder, Chris Taggart. This undeniably supported OpenCorporates while the 
organisation was trying to grow, and ultimately move towards a more 
sustainable business model.  
 
Case study: OpenCorporates 
OpenCoporates, founded in 2011, is the largest open database of companies 
in the world, with information collected on 180 million companies, from about 
140 different jurisdictions. OpenCorporates is a social enterprise and therefore 
a “for profit working in public benefit”. 
Following a couple of years of financial support from the founder, Chris 
Taggart, the organisation was supported by grants from the likes of the Sloan 
Foundation.  
OpenCorporates talks of its ‘unique’ public-private benefit business model 
which combines open and free access to data for all customers, with a tiered 
payment structure for companies to purchase access to bulk structured data 
and APIs. The commercial revenue is used to enhance the free offering, which 
increases the number of people who are likely to use the service. It believes in 
43
 Figshare (2017), ‘ORG ID WG Governance Principles and Recommendations’, 
https://figshare.com/articles/ORG_ID_WG_Governance_Principles_and_Recommendations/5402002/1  
44
 ORCID (n.d.), https://orcid.org/ 
45
 Crossref (n.d.), ​https://www.crossref.org/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   27 

 
the ‘many eyes’ approach of improving the product for everyone, including 
commercial customers.  
The team strives for around 80% of revenue to be attained via commercial 
routes, with the final 20% grant funding to use for research and development.  
In 2018, the OpenCorporates Trust was formally established to protect the 
long-term sustainability of the organisation. It protects the organisation – and 
the data it stewards – from being sold to a third party, as has happened in 
recent years with other company data sites such as Bureau van Dijk and 
46
Avention.  
47
 
Revenue models evolve over time 
Over time, several organisations have shifted away from, or talked about plans to 
shift away from, initial grant funding towards more dependence on earned revenue 
from their key activities. For example:  
●HiLo has plans to generate 40% of its revenue from new analytical products 
and new ways of accessing and using data, with the rest coming from 
subscription fees.  
●OpenCorporates has also moved from an approximately equal split between 
grants and API service subscription fees to a 25–75% split over time 
respectively.  
●HESA is expecting to see an increase in the revenue generated through the 
bespoke products and services – such as tailored datasets and reports, 
analytical services and training – offered in collaboration with Jisc, with 
48
whom they have a revenue sharing arrangement.  
●ROR’s ambition is to eventually transition completely from grants and 
donations, to a commercial model (which has still to be defined). 
The UK Biobank, on the other hand, has a 10-year history of being funded through 
grants from a number of major donors. It is the only medical research resource 
among the data institutions we explored in detail and it was set up with significant 
financial backing from major governmental and charity donors. 
In addition to evolving their revenue model, some data institutions may strive to 
evolve their business model over the lifecycle of the institution. In particular, data 
institutions may seek to change how they deliver value, for example by adding 
analytical capacity or providing technical infrastructure for data collection. This will 
obviously add to the costs of a data institution and have an impact on its 
sustainability.  
 
46
 Reuters (2017), ‘Moody's Corp to buy Bureau van Dijk for about $3.3 billion’, 
reuters.com/article/us-bureauvandijk-m-a-moody-s-idUSKCN18B1CZ  
47
 Bloomberg (2017), ‘Dun & Bradstreet Acquires Avention, the Maker of OneSource; Expands Presence & 
Offerings in B2B Sales Acceleration Market’, 
https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2017-01-10/dun-bradstreet-acquires-avention-the-maker-of-
onesource-expands-presence-offerings-in-b2b-sales-acceleration-market  
48
 HESA (n.d.), ‘HESA data analytics services are now delivered by Jisc’, ​https://www.hesa.ac.uk/services 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   28 

 
Data institutions that are planning to evolve their business model will need to ensure 
that they have acquired appropriate capital to cover the costs of evaluation and 
subsequent change processes, which may require additional short-term investments 
(for example on fixed assets) as well as an updated future cost structure.  
Institutions plan for future investments 
Data institutions also need to plan for covering the costs of operational maintenance 
and future investments in modernising their infrastructure, and the iterative process of 
evaluation and re-design. In our research, we have seen the following approaches to 
funding investments.  
HESA highlighted the importance of not only covering its cost base, but establishing 
the financial headroom to be able to reinvest in the organisation and maintain 
operational effectiveness and clientele. HESA noted: “With a changing data 
environment and changing expectations from stakeholders and customers, comes a 
need to reinvest and update systems and processes.” Forming collaborations rather 
than necessarily raising new funds was one way HESA was accomplishing offering 
new services. A department of HESA was transferred to Jisc in 2019 to provide 
advanced data analytics for the higher education sector. Collaborations and sharing 
services with other organisations is also a way of increasing efficiency in the delivery 
of a public good in the case of HESA.  
In our research we looked at ‘trust ports’ to see if we can learn from their practices. 
Trust ports are a type of authority in the UK that own and operate UK ports. Trust 
ports are set up by an Act of Parliament and controlled and administered by a 
self-governing independent statutory body. Trust port governance structures are 
particularly designed to reflect local markets and the needs of local communities.  
We found trust ports comparable to data institutions, although their role is stewarding 
a physical, rather than a digital, resource on behalf of a community. There are 
approximately 100 trust ports in the UK. The trust model: “allows the Harbour to 
operate in a commercial environment with no direct public funding, but also enables it 
to compete in the open market with private and local authority-owned facilities that 
represent the vast majority of the UK’s ports” . Trust ports are independent 
49
statutory bodies. They “[have] no shareholders who require a dividend, instead all 
‘profit’ or surpluses made from Trust Port operations are reinvested into the 
operation, maintenance and administration of the port.”  
A trust port study from 2016 listed potential ways trust ports can fund investment to 
50
improve or replace their assets and to develop or acquire new ones. These include 
their own resources (retained profits and reserves), borrowing from commercial 
sources, entering into joint ventures with third parties or accessing publicly provided 
support, for example through Local Enterprise Partnerships and Local Growth Funds, 
or from European Union  sources such as the Connecting Europe Facility. The study, 
however, also found that “the trust port model may not necessarily be the correct one 
to deliver strategic objectives of ports where they involve major transformative 
investments”. We will discuss the corresponding challenges in the next chapter.  
49
 Aberdeen Harbour (n.d.), ‘What makes a trust port’, 
http://www.aberdeen-harbour.co.uk/article/what-makes-a-trust-port/  
50
 Department for Transport (2016), ‘Trust Port Study Key Findings and Recommendations’, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525076
/trust-port-study-key-findings-and-recommendations.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   29 

 
The ‘Power of Partnership’ report on different approaches to public–private 
51
partnership in the provision of hydromet services – services that provide real-time 
weather, water, early-warning and climate information products to end users – also 
52
highlights the need to plan for maintaining and strengthening the weather 
infrastructure as problems may arise over time. Similarly, the ‘Weathering the 
53
Change: How to Improve HydrometServices in Developing Countries’ report 
54
provides some guidance on how to take a national meteorological and hydrological 
service through a process of modernisation and ensure adequate financial planning.  
Data institutions develop contingency plans 
We explored whether and how data institutions are planning to ensure the 
sustainability of data and related infrastructure beyond their own existence. We were 
interested in whether, in line with the idea of putting in place insurance mechanisms 
for when something goes wrong, they had considered succession planning and had 
55
put in place any mechanism to enable the community to replicate the system if their 
organisation was to wind down.  
Most of the institutions we talked to are thinking about contingency planning. For 
HESA, as an agency with a statutory function, this is focused on maintaining its role 
as the provider of that function in the long term. To do that, HESA does scenario 
planning and reassesses the situation periodically. For other data institutions, the 
focus is on ensuring the sustainability of the data in case they were no longer 
operational. Some institutions have built on open-source practices and integrated 
relevant considerations into the design of their institutions. ROR’s ‘Governance 
recommendations’ from 2017 – before the official launch of the registry – highlights 
56
that “the new Registry organisation should have protections in place for assets to go 
to another non-profit with a similar mission if the organisation is wound up.” In line 
with the recommendations, all software developed to run and support the registry is 
open source, which means others could feasibly run the same code if ROR ceased to 
exist.  
The ‘Data Trust for Open Access Ebook Usage’, a project in its pilot stage to improve 
the measurement and analysis of open-access ebooks, plans to create “a 
technological infrastructure released as open-source code with full documentation”. 
57
OpenCorporates, besides making everything openly available, also ensures that the 
data it stewards cannot be sold, by incorporating the OpenCorporates Trust. The 
Trust helps to ensure that the organisation is independent and the data will always be 
available to public benefit and commercial users.  
58
51
 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (2019), ‘The Power 
of Partnership: Public and Private Engagement in Hydromet Services‘, 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/The%20Power%20of%20Partnership_WEB.pdf  
52
 The World Bank (2017), ‘Hydromet’, ​https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2017/12/01/hydromet  
53
 Ibid, p80  
54
 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (2019), ‘Weathering the Change: How to Improve 
Hydromet Services in Developing Countries’, 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/weathering%20the%20change_web_0.pdf 
55
 Bilder G, Lin J, Neylon C (2015), ‘Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructure’, 
https://wiki.lib.sun.ac.za/images/f/f6/2015-principle-for-open-scholary-communication-infrastructures.pdf  
56
 Figshare (2017), ‘ORG ID WG Governance Principles and Recommendations’, 
https://figshare.com/articles/ORG_ID_WG_Governance_Principles_and_Recommendations/5402002/1   
57
 Hawkins K (2019), ‘Grant Proposal: Developing a Data Trust for Open Access Ebook Usage’, 
https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc1596980/?q=legal  
58
 OpenCorporates (n.d.), ‘Governance’, ​https://opencorporates.com/info/governance/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   30 

 
Good governance and community support are 
critical to sustainability 
Good governance and a strong supporting community are frequently discussed in the 
context of sustainable organisations. Although we have focused much of this initial 
research on financial sustainability, we recognise that “the problems of sustainability 
are not merely ones of finance but of political economy, which means that focusing 
purely on financial sustainability in the absence of considering governance principles 
and community is the wrong approach.” 
59
The ‘Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructures’ paper details the interlinked 
60
nature of governance and community: “trust is built on three pillars: good governance 
(and therefore good intentions), capacity and resources (sustainability), and 
believable insurance mechanisms for when something goes wrong.” When “an 
61
infrastructure is successful [it] becomes critical to the community” it needs to be 
ensured that “it is not co-opted by particular interest groups. Similarly, we need to 
ensure that any organisation does not confuse serving itself with serving its 
stakeholders.” 
The article ‘Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The 
Lessons that Olson can teach us’ sets out that: “Crises of financial sustainability (or 
62
challenges of expansion) for these organisations are often coupled with or lead to a 
crisis in governance and/or community trust.” 
In the interviews we conducted, several organisations highlighted one and/or the 
other aspect as key to their sustainability.  
ROR, for instance, mentioned the importance of community uptake and adoption 
with “community [being] at the heart of what ROR is trying to do... [They] need the 
data to be used and adopted and the data trusted by the people who are using it​.​” 
ROR sees its work, including decisions around its revenue model, as guided by 
community needs and interests. MusicBrainz also emphasised that “the bottom line 
is about helping customers take and use the data” and “having an offering to 
customers that you are serious, credible and also technically credible”. 
The good governance guidance for statutory harbour authorities provides detailed 
63
guidance for trust ports in particular on aspects of good governance, including 
stakeholder engagement, given their nature as independent statutory bodies. The key 
principles established in the guidance include being guided by the interests of the 
wide community of stakeholders at all times, reinvesting surpluses to support the 
long-term success of the port, and consulting stakeholders on significant decisions.  
59
 Neylon C (2017), ‘Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The lessons that Olson 
can teach us’, ​https://kula.uvic.ca/articles/10.5334/kula.7/  
60
 Bilder G, Lin J, Neylon C (2015), ‘Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructure’, 
https://wiki.lib.sun.ac.za/images/f/f6/2015-principle-for-open-scholary-communication-infrastructures.pdf  
61
 Neylon C (2017), ‘Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The lessons that Olson 
can teach us’, ​https://kula.uvic.ca/articles/10.5334/kula.7/  
62
Ibid. 
63
 GOV.UK (2018), ‘Ports Good GovernanceGuidance: Moving Britain Ahead’, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/684839
/ports-good-governance-guidance.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   31 

 
In general, good organisational design is essential to the creation of both sustainable 
and trustworthy institutions. For more discussion on this, see the section on 
‘Organisational design’ in our report on ‘Designing trustworthy data institutions’. 
64
Issues and tensions with 
achieving sustainability 
In the previous section we highlighted some of the common approaches that 
institutions are taking towards building sustainable revenue models. In this section 
we highlight some of the common issues and tensions that we have observed. 
Difficulty in attracting early financing 
As our research on data trusts has highlighted, all data institutions will need to go 
through adequate scoping and co-design stages. These stages will help to identify 
the purpose for the data institution, align its community around a common vision and 
ensure that it is designed to achieve its goals, reflect the need to build trust through 
strong governance, and plan for longer-term sustainability. 
 
These phases may take some time to complete. They are likely to be iterative as new 
ideas and approaches are tested with the community. Completing this process 
requires both time and investment.  
 
With a limited ability to raise revenue before being fully operational, in order to finance 
these early stages, data institutions are likely to rely heavily on grants, voluntary time 
and other in-kind investments. This emphasises the need to clearly articulate a 
shared vision and the ability to engage with funders who are comfortable with a 
strong level of uncertainty in outcomes.  
 
Loans, debt financing and venture funding are alternatives to grants, but these have 
their own limitations. Loans and debt financing will require some certainty around 
long-term income so that funders can be certain they will be repaid. This implies that 
some early groundwork must be completed which will still require financing. Venture 
funding is often geared around equity which, as we noted in the previous section, 
may create additional tensions around sustainability and the long-term goals of the 
institution. Impact investment, where success is measured in terms of social or 
environmental impact alongside financial benefits, may be a better fit. 
 
OpenCorporates explained during our interview how many forms of finance are off 
the cards for it because it is a social enterprise, and therefore, there are no profits or 
assets to reclaim or benefit from. The end goal of venture capital funding is an exit – 
or “someone else taking control, whether it’s stakeholders in the stock market, or 
other owners squeezing it” – and the independent structure of OpenCorporates 
prevents that. 
 
In our research we also came across an issue trust ports had in attracting financing 
for major investments: “trust ports generally face a more limited range of options on 
64
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Trustworthy data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-trustworthy-data-institutions  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   32 

 
how to deliver [major transformative]  investment compared to ports in private 
ownership... [Trust ports] do not have access to new equity and are not part of wider 
groups of ports potentially with access to wider and deeper sources of funding.”  
65
 
Existing incubation models, which can provide a range of financial and non-financial 
support to early stage organisations, also tend to be geared more towards 
businesses rather than social enterprises. However, there are a growing number of 
accelerators and incubators that cater for non-profit organisations. 
66
Aligning revenue models with institutional goals 
There are a number of potential tensions between the purpose of an institution and 
the sources of revenue that are available. 
 
The following table summarises a range of tensions in relation to some common 
institutional goals we have seen across data institutions. A specific institution may be 
trying to fulfil several of these goals as part of its broader purpose. Resolving these 
tensions may help to increase sustainability and trust in the institution. 
 
 
Institutional goal Tensions related to specific revenue models and possible 
alternatives 
Governing access to data on 
behalf of a group of data 
contributors 
 
For example, to mitigate harms as 
a trusted intermediary or broker  
Charging data users to access data creates tension by 
incentivising the data institution to share data with more users to 
secure greater revenue. 
 
Alternatives​: charging for services to analyse stewarded data to 
provide insights, rather than charging for data access; charging 
data contributors to steward data on their behalf. 
Increasing access to data to 
enable it to be used by a broader 
ecosystem 
 
For example, to provide a 
centralised pool of authoritative, 
standardised data 
Charging data users to access or license data creates tension 
because to avoid data users providing onward access to that 
data, data institutions are incentivised to limit the ability of data 
users to enrich and redistribute data for other purposes.  
 
Providing services to analyse data creates tension because a 
data institution may be competing with its own data users. 
 
Alternatives​: providing optional services, such as training or 
consulting, to support use of data that is available via a range of 
options, for example, using standard or custom data feeds, 
under open licences.  
Long-term stewardship of a data 
asset 
 
For example, to archive or ensure 
ongoing access to data over the 
long term 
Relying on time-limited funding, such as grants, or uneven 
funding, such as donations, creates tension by reducing the 
ability for the data institution to predict future revenues and plan 
investments in its core infrastructure. 
 
Alternatives​: charging both data contributors and users 
recurring membership and subscription fees to cover provision 
65
 Department for Transport (2016), ‘Trust Port Study Key Findings and Recommendations’, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525076
/trust-port-study-key-findings-and-recommendations.pdf  
66
 Donorbox (2018), ‘9 Best Startup Accelerators For Nonprofits And Social Entrepreneurs’, 
https://donorbox.org/nonprofit-blog/best-startup-accelerators-for-nonprofits/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   33 

 
of shared infrastructure; providing services to support the 
analysis and use of data. 
Maintaining a data asset on 
behalf of a community 
 
For example, supporting the 
collaborative maintenance of a 
shared resource 
Charging data contributors for making contributions to the 
dataset creates tension as it discourages regular contributions 
or participation by some contributors. 
 
Alternatives​: providing optional services to support use of data 
that is available via a range of options, under open licences; 
charging both data contributors and data users membership 
fees to cover provision of shared infrastructure. 
Providing a data-enabled service 
to a community 
 
For example, benchmarking or 
secure analysis of an aggregate 
dataset 
Reliance on membership fees, donations or time-limited funding 
creates tension as these sources may not scale in line with the 
demand for service provision. 
 
Generating revenue from providing access to data may create 
tension if the core needs of the community aren’t met by the 
services developed by data users.  
 
Revenue sources based on charging for updating or depositing 
data may also create tension if it discourages a wider 
community from contributing to the common datasets, leading 
to reduced utility. 
 
Alternatives​: directly charging for use of the primary service; 
charging membership fees for decision makers and contributors. 
Supporting a broad community 
 
For example, enabling a 
community of small and large 
businesses and non-profit 
organisations to participate in the 
data ecosystem 
Use of standard fees for membership can create tension by 
discouraging startups or not-for-profits in contributing to, or 
from using, data. 
 
Charging for all data uses may create tension by discouraging 
use of data by smaller organisations and not-for-profits that are 
unable to cover costs. 
 
Alternatives​: use scaling membership fees, freemium models 
and tiered pricing to enable a broader set of uses; provide 
models that support use of data for research or product 
development purposes. 
Generation of revenue for a third 
party 
 
For example, shareholders, 
investors or funders that are not 
directly participating in the data 
ecosystem 
Using a data institution as a means of generating and extracting 
revenue from a community creates tension as it means the data 
institution is not able to return that value to its data ecosystem, 
and invest in and grow its core infrastructure. 
 
Alternatives​: use institutional forms and revenue models that 
ensure that value is retained in the data institution, with surplus 
either reinvested or shared back with the ecosystem in other 
forms. 
Independent stewardship of data The need to maintain independence around the purpose of a 
data institution and the goals of its community can create 
tension when using revenue from funders or investors that have 
their own goals or priorities. This is especially true when funding 
comes with limitations on how money can be spent, or with 
expectations on specific deliverables. 
 
Alternatives​: find funders or investors whose goals and values 
align with the mission of the organisation; look for 
core/unrestricted funding rather than restricted or project grants.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   34 

 
Table 5: ​Summarising a range of tensions in relation to some common institutional goals we have seen 
across data institutions 
These tensions and the alternatives can be illustrated with reference to some of the 
data institutions and similar organisations that we have explored in our desk research 
and interviews. For example, OpenCorporates stewards a wealth of company data 
that it could use to generate revenue by selling access to it. But, it believes that this 
data should be open and available to everyone for societal benefit:​ ​“if people don’t 
have access to this dataset then there will be an asymmetry of access... which is 
highly problematic for society.” Therefore, OpenCorporates does not “restrict access 
to data or its website based on how much money you have, nor do you get access to 
more or different data”. Their model is therefore largely based around balancing 
tensions between openness and the need to apply some restrictions on the use of 
the data to be sustainable. ROR similarly suggested that this is the reason behind its 
reticence in turning their offering into a commercial product.  
OpenCorporates believes that having many ‘open eyes’ on the data – people to look 
at, access, use, share and query the data – will drive in commercial customers. All of 
OpenCorproates’ data is available openly for all to use, but additional services, such 
as access to bulk structured data, or use of the API, are charged for. The commercial 
customers provide revenue for OpenCorporates to improve the data, and the services 
on top of it, for a better product for everybody. In a blog from 2017, they stated that 
they ​“​don’t see commercial income as a necessary evil, but as an essential and 
intrinsic part of OpenCorporates”. 
67
OpenCorporates does not want to rely on grant funding as it is “fickle, and rarely 
long-term”. ​This is partly due to the time and costs of repeatedly applying for 
68
grants: “getting grants is not easy and we don't assume it’s going to happen.” In our 
interview they indicated that they don’t want to​ ​“base [their] sustainability and 
survival”​ ​on this instability. However, the UK Biobank is one data institution that, due 
to the nature of their work, has been able to achieve sustainability while existing 
solely on grant funding. As a long-term research project, grant funding may be 
appropriate as the costs are unlikely to change and growth isn’t an ambition.  
Other data institutions also demonstrate how important maintaining a balanced 
revenue model can be to achieving sustainability in ways that don’t conflict with the 
core mission of the institution. 
A good example is that of the Israel Meteorological Service (IMS). A case study 
69
reviewing the migration of IMS from a model of charging for access to data to a 
purely open data model highlights a range of tensions. For example, the organisation 
incurred additional costs from supporting its commercial services that reduced its 
investment in delivering on its broader public good mission. According to that case 
study, its commercial model led to unfair competition in the marketplace and drove 
users to lower quality data.  
HESA described to us how its business model has adjusted over time. It wanted to 
move away from commercialisation of data resources towards commercialisation 
based on expertise, such as data analysis and data visualisation. Its board of 
67
 OpenCorporates (2017), ‘A corporate structure for the public benefit and the long term’, 
https://blog.opencorporates.com/2017/07/06/a-corporate-structure-for-the-public-benefit-and-the-long-te
rm/  
68
 OpenCorporates (2017), ‘A corporate structure for the public benefit and the long term’, 
https://blog.opencorporates.com/2017/07/06/a-corporate-structure-for-the-public-benefit-and-the-long-te
rm/  
69
 World Meteorological Organization (2016), ‘Case Study: Free data access – the experience of the Israel 
Meteorological Service’, 
https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/meteoworld/case-study-free-data-access-%E2%80%93-experience-
of-israel-meteorological-service 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   35 

 
directors have always been cautious in ensuring that HESA’s commercial activities 
are not in conflict (or perceived by stakeholders to be in conflict) with HESA’s core 
functions. This has meant that potential revenue streams, such as being paid to 
facilitate direct marketing by commercial third parties, have been deemed 
unacceptable by HESA. 
OpenStreetMap has a number of corporate sponsors that provide funding and are 
70
increasingly involved in the project by contributing data, open source code and other 
resources. These contributions help make the project more sustainable, but have 
71
raised concerns from the existing community about the ease with which those 
organisations could shape the future of the project.  
The ever-evolving relationship between a data 
institution and its community 
The relationship between data institutions and the communities that surround and 
support them is one of mutual interaction and influence. A change or evolution of 
either of these is bound to have an impact on, or bring about changes in, the other. 
Over the life of a data institution, this changing relationship can present a number of 
challenges.  
 
For instance, as a data institution grows, the community around it is likely to grow as 
well. Yet as a community grows, the needs, motives and expectations of that 
community are almost certain to evolve. This will necessarily force the data institution 
to reassess not only how it serves its community, but how it attempts to achieve 
sustainability. HESA touched on this point in response to a question about how to 
remain sustainable: “Update systems and processes: the data environment is 
changing, expectations from the public are changing, so it is needed to adapt to 
changing expectations of stakeholders and customers”. 
 
Not surprisingly, different data institutions have sought to adapt in different ways. 
Some, like OpenCorporates, have sought to introduce commercial products that 
meet the needs of specific parties in their ecosystem. These products need to remain 
useful, of course, so as circumstances and the needs of these parties change, the 
commercial products must change as well. 
 
In seeking to evolve, scale and adapt to changing circumstances, however, it is 
important that data institutions assess whether they will be changing in ways that will 
upset or alienate members of their current community, clientele or ecosystem.  
 
For instance, as a data institution grows, it might seek to add a commercial offering 
to remain sustainable, but in doing so, might disappoint or draw the ire of members 
of their ecosystem who interpret that change as going against the initial ‘open’ ethos 
of the institution. npm Inc. serves as a useful case in point. The package manager 
was created in 2009 as an open-source project aimed at helping JavaScript 
developers share packages of code, but made the decision to transition to become a 
private company, npm Inc, in 2014. The company has since found itself at the centre 
of a number of controversies wherein questions have been raised about whether its 
70
 OpenStreetMap Foundation, ‘Corporate Members’, 
https://wiki.osmfoundation.org/wiki/Corporate_Members 
71
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘How Facebook, Apple and Microsoft are contributing to an openly licensed 
map of the world’, 
https://theodi.org/article/how-are-facebook-apple-and-microsoft-contributing-to-openstreetmap/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   36 

 
commitment is to commercial companies or the open source community. Some in 
the community contend that a for-profit company should not be allowed to steward 
such an important piece of infrastructure and have begun working to create an open 
source service to replace npm. 
72
 
Similarly, as a data institution grows and evolves, it may attempt to evolve its 
business model (possibly by offering new services or by welcoming new data 
contributors, users or decision makers to the ecosystem), but by doing so, may 
disconcert the original members of the community who interpret these changes as 
disrupting the original balance of the system.  
 
Take the example of a data institution that has been set up to steward data on behalf 
of data contributors and exclusively share analyses and insights back to those data 
contributors. At some point in its lifecycle, that data institution may receive requests 
from non-contributors who want access to the data it stewards, particularly if the 
data would have value for parties beyond the direct data contributors – for example, 
for academic researchers. These researchers might be willing to pay for access to the 
data – thereby offering the institution a new source of revenue to support their 
sustainability – but might not have relevant or useful data to contribute. In this case, a 
data institution would have to weigh the benefits of a new form of revenue against 
any potential tensions caused by the introduction of new data users. For instance, the 
original data contributors may feel that providing access to non-contributors goes 
against the terms or spirit of the original data sharing arrangement, or may contend 
that providing access to non-contributors creates an asymmetrical value distribution, 
since non-contributors are sharing in the benefits without contributing data.  
 
Crossref has encountered a similar tension due to an increased move to open access 
publishing models in its sector. This has changed perceptions of the value 
proposition of Crossref within the ecosystem and the ways in which it might generate 
revenue in future. Crossref has recently commissioned research to help identify and 
73
explore those issues with its community. The results clearly identify tensions across 
74
different parts of its ecosystem and an evolving role from a service specifically for 
commercial publishers to one of key infrastructure serving a broader community. 
75
 
As data institutions, and the communities they serve, evolve and expand, it is 
important that data institutions are conscious of the consequences of 
over-expansion. A data institution that expands to offer additional services or take on 
more functions within an ecosystem, may end up hurting the overall health of the 
ecosystem.  
 
Some public sector data institutions, for instance, offer value-added products or 
consulting services alongside the datasets they steward. These are valuable and 
worthwhile products and services, but a 2006 study by the Office of Fair Trading 
found that when public sector information holders offer these types of products and 
services, they run the risk of competing with the people and organisations within that 
ecosystem who also offer value-added products or consulting services.  
76
72
 The Register (2019), ‘Hey, NPM. How do you like your Bogensberger? He's, well, done: CEO Bryan 
ejects from biz’, ​https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/09/20/npm_ceo_bryan_bogensbergers_off/  
73
 Brand A (2019), ‘Guest Post — Crossref at a Crossroads: All Roads Lead to Crossref’, 
https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2019/10/22/crossref-at-a-crossroads-all-roads-lead-to-crossref/ 
74
 Pentz E (2020), ‘A turning point is a time for reflection’, 
https://www.crossref.org/blog/a-turning-point-is-a-time-for-reflection/ 
75
 Shift Learning (2019), ‘Crossref Value and Benefits, 
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RsqtnHssBkaFNphdWoq20_ewruYP04n8j_dYB9wvphM/edit#slid
e=id.g65af51c04a_1_807 
76
 DotEcon (2015), ‘Independent evaluation of the OFT’s 2006 market study into the Commercial Use of 
Public Information’, 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   37 

 
 
Over-expansion by a data institution could also lead to an ecosystem that becomes 
overly centralised with too many functions running through a single data institution. 
That institution might not be able to satisfy the needs of a broader community as well 
as one that adopts a more limited role but enables a more diverse and distributed 
ecosystem. In the end, this might limit the data institution’s ability to satisfy its 
purpose. Mitigating this centralising effect can involve: providing a variety of ways to 
access data, to allow alternative and competing approaches; maintaining a 
separation between the institution’s primary purpose and commercial operations; and 
early consultation with data users to gather feedback and to give time for the wider 
ecosystem to evolve and adapt as the institution itself changes. 
 
At the same time, it is also true that many data institutions support value creation 
beyond the data users or decision makers found in their immediate ecosystems. 
These competing interests represent a tension that data institutions will need to be 
aware of as they work to balance their own sustainability and growth with the 
sustainability and growth of their community. 
 
The tensions outlined in this section help reinforce the point, mentioned above, that 
when exploring options for evolving or expanding, data institutions would be well 
advised to engage with their community early on, to ascertain whether plans are 
sustainable, whether it would negatively impact the rest of the community, or whether 
it would be seen as going against the existing agreement with the community.  
 
For further discussion on how expectations and agreements between parties in an 
ecosystem can change – and how those changes can influence not only the 
sustainability of a data institution but also its perceived trustworthiness – see our 
report on ‘Designing trustworthy data institutions’. 
77
  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/commercial-use-of-public-information-evaluation-of-oft-mar
ket-study 
77
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Trustworthy data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-trustworthy-data-institutions/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   38 

 
Conclusion and 
recommendations 
This report summarises an initial exploratory study to help understand the factors that 
contribute to the creation of sustainable data institutions. To conclude, we identify 
some areas for further research and provide some initial recommendations for those 
currently working on scoping, designing and running data institutions.  
Areas for further research 
We plan to apply the framework introduced in this report to support further analysis 
of the business and revenue models adopted by data institutions. This will allow us to 
expand our initial investigation and explore additional examples across a range of 
sectors. 
 
In particular, there are several areas which merit further work. These include: 
 
●Developing a more comprehensive review of the business and revenue 
models adopted by different types of data institutions across sectors, and in 
particular exploring some failed or retired institutions.  
●Further work to understand the tension between different revenue streams 
and the goals of data institutions, with a view towards providing 
recommendations of specific revenue models for different types of data 
institutions operating in different contexts and communities. 
●Exploring how the sector, domain and context of a data institution affects the 
available financing and funding opportunities.  
●Understanding the role of funders in supporting the growth and sustainability 
of data institutions, particularly in the transition from scoping and co-design, 
to launch and operation, 
●Further research on the role of governance and community in the 
sustainability of data institutions, to explore the interplay between this 
research on sustainability and the concurrent work on trustworthiness. 
78
●Conducting economic assessments on the value of data institutions to help 
demonstrate their value and impact, to support organisations applying for 
financing and funding. 
●Exploring the operational, evaluation, re-design and retirement costs 
associated with different types of data institutions, to help support financial 
planning. 
●Developing and testing guidance and tools, for example a canvas or financial 
planning tool, to help support data institutions develop business and revenue 
models and estimate their costs and investment requirements. 
We welcome collaboration with other organisations working in this area. 
78
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘Trustworthy data institutions’, 
https://theodi.org/project/rd-trustworthy-data-institutions  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   39 

 
Suggestions for those scoping, designing and 
running data institutions 
While our exploratory research was not intended to produce a comprehensive survey 
of the many data institutions that exist across sectors, through our desk research and 
interviews we have already identified some common issues and challenges in the 
design of sustainable business and revenue models.  
 
Based on those insights, we offer some initial suggestions for those currently 
scoping, designing and running data institutions, to help them navigate the complex 
decisions needed to reach sustainability. 
 
1.Ensure your revenue model aligns with your organisational goals 
○Develop a​ ​clear understanding of the data ecosystem that your 
institution will be creating and supporting​, and the ways in which 
value will be created and shared. 
○We have highlighted a number of tensions that can arise between 
specific sources of revenue and the broader goals of an institution. It 
is important to ​consider how adopting specific revenue streams 
will impact the operational focus, cost structure and ecosystem 
of your institution​. Fundamentally, the revenue model should be 
aligned with the goals of your institution and not run contrary to 
them.  
2.Understand how your revenue sources will change during your 
institution’s lifecycle 
○Recognise the difference between the financing needed to 
scope, design and launch a data institution, and your ongoing 
sources of revenue​. The organisations and individuals providing you 
with revenue and their needs and expectations will be different at 
different stages in your institution’s lifecycle. 
○Develop a clear plan for your future revenue model to help 
unlock early financing​ and support from other organisations. 
○Plan to evolve your revenue model over time​ to adapt to changes 
in circumstances and the needs of your ecosystem, for example by 
regularly evaluating this aspect of your operation. This will help to 
ensure that you are able to remain relevant and sustainable. 
3.Consider both financial and non-financial aspects of sustainability  
○Your data institution should have a governance structure that 
aligns with your goal for sustainability.​ This might include adopting 
specific legal forms.  
○Data institutions should invest in maintaining and growing their 
community​ and ensuring that their product or service remains useful 
to them. If your data institution relies on the community for data, 
ensure that the process is as seamless as possible.  
4.Identify and mitigate future risks 
○Ensure that your revenue model is resilient​ and protected from 
shocks, such as the loss of a specific grant. 
○Ensure you have a contingency plan if you are not able to 
achieve sustainability. ​If your data institution is no longer able to 
operate, then you need to have planned for what happens to data, 
code and other assets. Making these open, where possible, will allow 
others to build on your work.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   40 

 
5.Learn from others 
○Across sectors there are many examples of long-standing data 
institutions that can provide a model for success. ​Engage with and 
learn from those organisations​ to help you navigate some of the 
complex choices you are faced with. 
○Work openly to share your successes and failures. ​It is helpful for 
data institutions to share the decisions they have made, the 
challenges they have faced and to be open about their business and 
revenue models. This report relied significantly upon blog posts and 
reports that existing organisations published about their journeys.  
 
We plan to apply these recommendations as we continue to work with a range of 
organisations working to establish new data institutions. As our research and 
practical work continues, we plan to revisit, revise and expand these 
recommendations.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   41 

 
Methodology 
To inform this exploratory research project, we conducted broad desk research into 
concepts of business and revenue models and sustainability relevant to the context 
of data institutions. We then defined a set of criteria to select different types of data 
institutions we would look at in more detail. We conducted desk research about these 
institutions and, where possible, interviewed representatives of the data institutions.  
The brief timeframe of this research resulted in several limitations, including:  
1.Limited number of interviews. 
2.Potential sector bias. Our desk research has been informed significantly by 
our prior knowledge of specific institutions. 
3.Focus on open infrastructure. Linked to the above, the revenue and business 
models we have encountered might be specific to data institutions operating 
an open infrastructure. 
Research questions 
Main research question​: What sustainable business models can be adopted by data 
institutions, and what are their respective benefits, costs and risks? 
 
Research questions: 
 
1.What revenue sources have contributed to the creation of data institutions? 
2.What revenue models have been adopted by successful data institutions? 
3.How does the revenue model evolve throughout the lifecycle of data 
institutions, eg during scoping and design, launch and early stages of 
operating, and later stages of operating?  
4.How might different business models align to the goals of different types of 
data institutions, for example, by supporting or conflicting with their core 
goals and mission? 
Criteria to select institutions 
In our research, we wanted to understand the experience of a diverse set of 
organisations. We decided to focus on organisations that met one or several of the 
following criteria:  
 
1.Type of data institution:  
a.Organisations that steward data on behalf of a community 
b.Organisations that steward digital resources or a platform on behalf 
of a community 
c.Organisations that steward a physical resource on behalf of a 
community or set of stakeholders 
2.Life stage of the data institution:  
a.Institutions in​ scoping or co-design stage​, so we can learn how 
they’re thinking about covering the costs of their launch and 
operation 
b.Institutions that are ​operational​ but relatively young, so we can learn 
about early experiences  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   42 

 
c.Well-established​ or ‘successful’ institutions, so we can learn what 
makes them successfully sustainable 
d.Organisations that tried to set up a data institution but could not 
overcome the challenges, so that we can learn about specifics of 
those challenges 
3.Main source of revenue: 
a.At least one data institution that is funded by a large funding body 
Desk research 
For each of the organisations studied, we gathered information related to: 
●General information about the organisation – core goals or mission 
●Establishment  
●Type of data institution – the functions it fulfils or services it provides 
●Revenue model – current, past and anticipated future revenue sources 
●Alignment of the organisation’s business model with its core goals 
Interviews 
We complemented the information gathered through desk research with interviews 
with representatives of data institutions. We interviewed representatives from five 
organisations covering some of the defined criteria: 
●HESA​ – as a well established (operational) organisation within the educational 
sector 
●MusicBrainz​ – as a well established (operational) and community-maintained 
project 
●OpenCorporates​ – as a well established (operational) organisation within the 
business information field 
●ROR​ – as a relatively young organisation offering open identifiers for every 
research organisation in the world 
●HiLo ​– as a relatively young organisation in the maritime industry 
The questions asked during the one-hour interviews covered themes related to: 
●Revenue streams 
●What sustainability looks like 
●Alignment of business models with the data institution’s core goals 
●Mechanisms for ensuring trustworthiness 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportDesigning sustainable data institutions   43 