

↡

Contents
Summary3
Background8
Chapter 1: Data literacy: what it is and why it matters11
How the ODI thinks about data literacy12
Figure 1: ODI Data Skills Framework13
The importance of measuring data literacy14
Figure 2: ODI Levels of Data Literacy15
Data literacy and other types of literacy16
Literacy and numeracy16
Financial literacy16
Digital literacy17
Media literacy18
AI literacy18
Other literacies19
How these overlapping literacies relate to the ODI framework20
Chapter 2: Data literacy and the UK government21
In the National Data Strategy22
In the National AI Strategy24
In other documents24
In individual government departments27
How these definitions relate to the ODI framework28
How others think about data literacy28
In the AI Roadmap30
How other definitions relate to the ODI framework31
Chapter 3: Public sector data literacy initiatives for government32
How training, learning and development works inside government33
Curriculum and campus34
Functions and professions35
Data masterclasses36
Other initiatives37
Assessing the offer against the ODI framework40
Chapter 4: Public sector data literacy initiatives for others41
The National Data Strategy41
Beyond the National Data Strategy42
Assessing the offer against the ODI framework44
Next steps45
Annex47
Public sector data literacy initiatives
for government47
Public sector data literacy initiatives for others48
Stakeholder engagement48
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government1

About
This report, published in April 2022, draws upon previous ODI work – including our
own Data Skills Framework – as well as desk research and interviews with key
stakeholders to understand the UK government’s current approach to data literacy.
The lead author is Gavin Freeguard (Special Adviser) and the wider project team
included Dr Mahlet “Milly” Zimeta (Head of Public Policy), Dr Dave Tarrant
(Programme Lead – Data Literacy, Senior Learning Advisor) and Violeta Mezeklieva
(Consultant and EU business development lead).
If you want to provide feedback or get in touch, contact us atpolicy@theodi.org
This is work in progress. It is likely to be updated as
we continue our work. Keep an eye out for updates!
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions
from the community in the comments.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government2

Summary
One of the six points in theODI’s manifestofor openand trustworthy data
ecosystems and a world where data works for everyone is data capability:
‘Everyone must have the opportunity to understand how data can be and is
being used. We need data literacy for all, data science skills, and experience
using data to help solve problems’.
This paper aims to map the UK government’s activity on ‘data literacy’, as part of
the ODI’s work in support of theUK National DataStrategy(NDS). The ODI
understands ‘data literacy’ as ‘the ability to thinkcritically about data in different
contexts and examine the impact of different approaches when collecting, using
and sharing data and information’. It goes beyond the technical skills involved in
working with data.
The UK government recognises the importance of data skills – ‘for a data-driven
economy and data-rich lives’ – by making itone ofthe four pillars of the NDS.
Within this, it says that ‘foundational data literacy will be required by all’.
How the government approaches ‘data literacy’ for its own workforce, in its
attempts to increase the use of data in policymaking and service delivery, engages
Mission 3 of the NDS – ‘transforming government’s use of data to drive efficiency
and improve public services’. Its policies and initiatives for the wider population
engage Mission 1, on ‘unlocking the value of data across the economy’. But the
government’s work on Mission 3 will also have an impact on Mission 1, as we
argued inour earlier reportmapping the organisationsresponsible for data across
the UK government.What the government does internallycan also affect the wider
economy and society, particularly given its role inleading by example, providing
support (eg in publishing resources), and collaborating with others. As a major
employer in its own right – public sector employment accounts formore than a
sixth of all employment in the UK– efforts to upskillits own workforce may have
an impact on other sectors, as it shapes the employment market and workers
move in and out of the public sector.
This paper, based on desk research and interviews with key stakeholders,
attempts to understand how the UK government is approaching data literacy, for
example by looking at how government (and others) think about ‘data literacy’ and
how this is reflected in initiatives to build data capability, both within the public
sector and for the wider population.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government3

It finds that:
1.While everyone – in documents from the NDS totheAI Roadmap, and in
conversations with key stakeholders – agrees that data literacy for all is
important, government has no consistent definition of ‘data literacy’
(reflecting the difficulty in settling on a definition found in the wider
literature). ‘Data literacy’ is often mentioned without being defined or
developed further. And it is quickly elided with more specialist, technical
data skills.There are several different strategies,documents and training
1
offers, but there is no obvious overarching framework for thinking about
data literacy. And these initiatives appear to ignore the government's own
earlier work, such as itsframework for essentialdigital skills. The lack of
definitions, combined with the multiple spheres and subjects ‘data literacy’
spans, can make measuring data literacy a challenge.
2.There are also other overlapping types of literacy – digital literacy, media
literacy, AI literacy, statistical literacy, tech literacy, information literacy,
analytical literacy, evaluation literacy and mathematical literacy all feature in
government documents and discussion alongside numeracy and financial
literacy. Data literacy is foundational for many of these. The NDS recognises
both the overarching problem with definitions, and these overlapping or
‘parallel’ skills, but government has not yet delivered its promised definition
of data literacy, or mapped out the distinctions between these skills and
their importance for the wider economy.
3.In 2021,we attempted to map the organisations responsiblefor ‘data’ in
government, because of our documented concern thatresponsibility was
fragmented across multiple bodies, work was being duplicated, and
different initiatives were not well aligned with each other. With several
different organisations responsible for ‘data literacy’ in government, and
the lack of a consistent definition across government, there is still a risk of
fragmentation, duplication and contradiction, and of not being able to
work out to what extent this is the case.
1
We are conscious that our own framework is called aData Skills Framework, even though it includesmore
strategic and critical skills that we describe as ‘literacy’ as well as more technical skills. For more on the
framework, see chapter 1.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government4

4.The government organisations with particular responsibility for data literacy in
the public sector appear to be making good progress and seem well aware of
the work that others are doing. There has been a welcome focus on improving
data capability within the civil service, withtheGovernment Skills and
Curriculum Unit(GSCU) and the various data-relatedfunctions and professions
(particularly theAnalysis FunctionandGovernmentStatistical Service)
producing and consolidating lots of training resources. In government
documents and in interviews, theData Masterclasses(originally for senior
leaders, but now offered to others), originated by the GSCU, then run jointly by
10DS (the Number 10 Data Science team) and theOfficefor National Statistics
(ONS) Data Science Campusand taken over by the latter,feature prominently
as a good example of teaching data literacy. However, it may still be possible
to better collect the wealth of material under a ‘data literacy’ heading and
understand what different organisations are doing on data literacy. And despite
the increasing amount of data literacy support available to people inside
government, much of it is provided through data-oriented professions and
functions, and some stakeholders we spoke to were conscious that more could
be offered at more general, basic and junior levels
5.Despite the government’s recognition of the importance of data literacy for
the wider population, there appears to be less activity and less alignment,
particularly with what the government is doing internally. TheDepartment
for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport(DCMS), throughthe NDS, is a key
player, working with other organisations including theDepartment for
Education(DfE) and theOffice for Students(OfS)on specific projects. The
Information Commissioner’s Office(ICO) (as the bodyresponsible for
regulating data rights, including data protection) and increasinglyOfcom
(responsible for overseeing a great deal ofthe OnlineSafety Bill) are likely to
play a role. But this appears less developed and less coherent than the
government’s internal offering. And, despite some big initiatives like the
Online Media Literacy Strategy, most initiatives focuson the individual as
employee, with an emphasis on the benefits to the workforce, rather on the
individual as citizen and the benefits to them within society – the
‘data-driven economy’ rather than the ‘data-rich lives’ mentioned in the
NDS.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government5

There is some promising work going on, particularly in upskilling public servants.
But a lack of consistent definition of ‘data literacy’ and a lack of alignment,
especially between initiatives focused on the public sector workforce and those
focused on the public more generally, mean that there is still work to do.
Key issues that need to be addressed include:
●
The lack of definitions around ‘data literacy’ and the other,
overlapping types of ‘literacy’.Something like theODI Data Skills
Framework(with its hexagons of different topics,see figure 1 on page 12)
and the forthcoming ODI Levels of Data Literacy (see figure 2 on page 14)
could help give some shape to this, as could a guide to how the various
other overlapping literacies relate to foundational data literacy and how
government thinks they all intersect.
●The risk of fragmentation, duplication and lack of awareness of
different work across government.Consistent definitionscould mitigate
this, and there has been excellent work within government to pull together
different resources from across different professions and functions – but
making such resources even easier to find and access – perhaps grouped
under a ‘data literacy’ heading – will make them easier for people to use
and integrate into their own training plans.
●The particular disconnection between government’s internal
initiatives and its public-facing data literacy work.The resources and
training offered inside government feels more extensive than many of the
current external initiatives. Increased openness about the materials
available, within government and to the wider population, could be of real
benefit and support government’s ambitions for data literacy for the wider
population and workforce.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government6

Background
In the 21
st
Century, every organisation is a dataorganisation, and should be
thinking about how it uses data and its role in wider data ecosystems.
Similarly, every role is now a data role. Whatever our job, we need some grasp of
data – its opportunities and its limitations – to perform effectively. Some jobs will
require more data capability than others – an entry-level administrative role and
developing sophisticated machine learning tools will have different needs – but it
is no longer acceptable to say ‘I don’t do data’.The ‘data economy’is growing
2
and accounted for more than 4%of UK GDP in 2020,and underpins billions of
pounds of imports and exports.
But all of this also applies to our roles outside work, as citizens, in households and
families, in our roles across the rest of our lives, as we all try to use, interpret and act
upon information. And if the government wants to investigate and implement more
ambitious data-related and artificial intelligence-enabled initiatives, they will require
public trust and understanding to succeed: citizens will need to have more than a
basic grasp of data so they can scrutinise and support such plans.
One of the six points in theODI’s manifestofor openand trustworthy data
ecosystems and ‘a world where data works for everyone’ is data capability:
‘Everyone must have the opportunity to understand how data can be and is
being used. We need data literacy for all, data science skills, and experience
using data to help solve problems’.And it is why‘data literacy’ – which the ODI
defines as being able to think critically about data in different contexts and
examine the impact of different approaches when collecting, using and sharing
data and information – is no longer a niche topic.
Data is a particular focus of the UK government plans at present. The pandemic
response brought data into the heart of government decisions like never before:
one minister described it as a ‘high watermark ofdata use’. The government’s
work and plans for the country are increasingly dependent on data, with aNDS,
UK Innovation Strategy,National AI Strategy, avisionfor foreign policythat
highlights the UK’s global role in AI and setting international standards, and a
multiplicity of organisationssupporting the use ofdata across government. The
forthcomingIntegrated Data Serviceand government’srecent proposals for data
protection reformhighlight its commitment to greatersharing of data between
public sector organisations and between the public and other sectors. As the
government does more with data, the public sector workforce and the general
public need more confidence in understanding what it is doing.
2
For some discussion of this in a business context, listen to the ODI’sInside Business podcast: Therole of
data literacy in building a trusted brandfrom March2022.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government7

The government recognises the importance of data skills – ‘for a data-driven
economy and data-rich lives’ – by making itone ofthe four pillars of the NDS.
Within this, it says that ‘foundational data literacy will be required by all’. The NDS
recognises these challenges for industry andfor itself:
Despite the many benefits that can be derived from data, institutionalised data
culture – where data is seen as everyone’s job and where data is seen to support
outcomes at all levels – is lacking in many organisations across government and the
wider public sector... everyone, regardless of seniority or profession, should see
data as a priority in their role – with data supporting each step of policy and delivery,
from scoping to ongoing performance tracking, evaluation and improvement.
The government’s approach to data literacy for its own workforce will have an
impact on the wider economy, as it leads by example, provides support (such as
making resources available) and collaborates with others. And it is a major
employer in its own right (public sector employment accounts formore than a
sixth of all employment in the UK), helping to shapethe wider employment market,
with workers moving in and out of the public sector.
Data literacy initiatives have a role in society, as well as the economy, as they can
support individuals, groups and organisations to play an active role in our
increasingly data-dominated world. They are also vital in government’s attempts to
build trust as it embarks on more advanced projects involving data and
technologies and techniques, like artificial intelligence (AI), as the public will need
some understanding of its plans and products.
So how exactly is the UK government thinking about data literacy, as it aims to
upskill its own workforce to better use data in making policy and delivering
services to the public, and strengthen data sharing between departments and
between government and other sectors? What initiatives are underway to
improve data literacy within government? And what is it doing to foster data
literacy more widely, in the general population and workforce? This report offers
some answers to these questions.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government8

This report draws on desk research and stakeholder interviews, and focuses on
the ‘supply side’ – what the government is doing to get the right structures and
support in place – rather than the ‘demand side’ – such as the public expecting a
more data literate government. One stakeholder we interviewed used the
Covid-19 pandemic as an example of where the public had driven improvements
in government – a desire for more and better data and better presentation at
Downing Street press conferences forced government to publish better data and
present it more clearly. They wondered whether similar public demands in the
future could help encourage data literacy in government and in the wider
population. (We hope this complements the work currently underway by others,
includingthe Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation(CDEI) and civil society
organisations such as the Ada Lovelace Institute, on the importance of public
understanding, trust and engagement.)
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government9

Chapter 1: Data literacy:
what it is and why it matters
“
Data skills deliver benefits across the board. Businesses are more likely
to be competitive in today’s digital-driven economy if they can use data
effectively. Likewise, data-literate individuals are more likely to benefit
from and contribute to the increasingly data-rich environments they live
and work in, while data-driven companies can deliver significant
productivity benefits to their own business and the wider economy.
DCMS,National Data Strategy
We live in the information age. There is more ‘data’ than at any point in human
history. This data can be used for good, provide us with more economic and
social opportunities than ever before, and help us be better informed; or it can be
used to exploit, to exclude, and to confuse. Helping people navigate this data-rich
world is therefore vital.
There are already divides in how we interact with this world.A 2020 report on
digital inclusion and online safetyby the Good ThingsFoundation has found that
‘low media, digital and personal data literacy leaves people open to risks and
harms: financial, social, emotional, personal and psychological’. Greater
knowledge about data and how it is and can be used can help counter this, but
‘people in lower socio-economic groups are less likely to see the benefits of
sharing their data, and more likely to feel powerless to address data-related
harms; while ethnic minority groups are slightly less likely to trust that their data
will be secure’. The government’s own tracker ofpublicattitudes towards data and
AI, run by the CDEI for the first time in 2022, findsthat only 20% of those with low
‘digital familiarity’ know ‘at least a fair amount about how data is used and
collected’, compared to 45% of the general population.
Greater data literacy can help people in their working and social lives. This isn’t a
view confined to the government’s policies towards data, such as the NDS: its
2021Plan for Growth(‘Build Back Better’) notes that‘more than a quarter of the
working-age population in England have low literacy or numeracy skills’, citing the
Industrial Strategy Council’s forecast that ‘five million workers could become
acutely under-skilled in basic digital skills by 2030’. The plan adds: ‘This holds
back those people from employment, limits their ability to progress, reduces
economic growth, and makes the UK a less attractive place to invest’.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government10

How the ODI thinks about data literacy
“
Data literacy is the ability to think critically about data in different
contexts and examine the impact of different approaches when
collecting, using and sharing data and information.
Open Data Institute
Following a blogpost on ‘data literature’ by ODI’sformer CEO, Jeni Tennison, we
often compare technical data skills to studying the English language, and ‘data
literacy’ to the study of English literature. Where the study of language focuses on
reading and writing and the production and manipulation of letters and words, the
study of literature ‘focuses on the study of that language in use, the material
produced by different authors, their use of different techniques, the context in
which they produced their works and the impact their work had’. If data language
involves the requisite technical skills to collect, analyse and visualise data, then
data literature or data literacy should be ‘the study of data and how it is collected,
used and shared by different organisations’.
Another metaphor might be that of a car. We don’t all need to know how to build a
car – although we do need some people with the technical skills to do so. But
most of us do need to know the basics: how brakes and tyres perform in different
weather conditions, the rules of the road, and the impact of buying an electric car
rather than a diesel.
Technical data skills are vital – we need specialists who can build tools, write code and
do things with data – but we also need everyone to have some ability to critique the
use of data, understand its limitations and recognise its impact on society. We need a
3
blend of those skills to unlock the value of data for the economy and society. We need
commercial awareness and understanding of how to identify the opportunities and
risks of data-driven innovation and how to govern emerging technologies responsibly.
4
Increased data literacy in a population should help governments, businesses and other
organisations evolve their data practices and become more trusted with data as a
4
‘A new finding from the interview data is the need for data scientists to have good business skills in order to
be able to understand business needs and to be able to effectively communicate insights. This is different from
domain expertise in that business skills are the skills required to make domain expertise effective.’ EDSA
(2015), ‘D1.2 Study Evaluation Report 1’,
https://edsa-project.eu/edsa-data/uploads/2015/02/EDSA-2015-P-D12-FINAL.pdf
3
‘When we asked which additional skills data scientists should have, communication and presentation skills
topped our list; other frequently demanded expertise is in teamwork, social skills and data management. Data
scientists are often hired with high expectations regarding their abilities to transform business tactics and
strategies; thus soft‐skills such as these are seen as desirable and need greater focus in data science training.’
EDSA (2016), ‘D1.4 Study Evaluation Report 2’,
https://edsa-project.eu/edsa-data/uploads/2015/02/EDSA-2016-P-D14-FINAL-withouthPrivateAppendix.pdf
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government11

result. Data literacy might include:
●
Comparing and contrasting how different people use numbers, graphs
and infographics to convey important messages on topics such as climate
change, population growth or global pandemics.
●Evaluating the impact of bias and limited sampling on important decisions, such
as those in the criminal justice system or when hiring workers for a company.
●Examining the ways that data is collected and the purposes of this
collection, such as irregular collection in a census, how sensors in trains,
cars and busses keep those vehicles running, or our interactions with
digital assistants.
It is worth underlining that these definitions do not apply only to numerical data.
The ODI’sData Skills Frameworkclarifies and categorisesvarious different data skills:
Figure 1: ODI Data Skills Framework
On the right-hand side are the more technical and practical skills involved in data
analysis and engineering. But on the left are those more critical, contextual and
strategic skills that might be involved in data literacy, supporting people to
understand and critique how data is and can be used. Down the middle are the skills
associated with being a ‘data translator’, someone able to balance both sides.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government12

The importance of measuring data literacy
Measuring data literacy is obviously important for understanding what the current
situation is, what aspects are particularly in need of improvement, where best to
target training and support, and to understand what progress is being made on
everything from the ambitions of the NDS to the necessary improvements in digital
skills recognised by the Plan for Growth.
But those working on data literacy, in government and elsewhere, note the
challenges in measuring data literacy and its impact in understanding the impact
of interventions. A good example of these was provided by the ONS in 2018. It
consideredcreating a ‘data literacy scale’, basedon the
Government Digital
Service (
GDS)’sdigital literacy scale, which couldscore people from ‘beginners’
(little interaction with data) to ‘pioneers’ (being able to deploy machine learning
and AI). One of the biggest challenges came from ‘conflating a number of different
spheres’ in trying to come up with an assessment scale, with those spheres
including everything from data formats, and tools and practices often associated
with data science, to understanding the limitations of data, visualising data,
understanding its licensing and re-use, right up to understanding the reason for
using the data in the first place. The lack of a consistent definition of ‘data literacy’
is clearly a hindrance.
As is the lack of previous work, metrics and data on measuring literacy and skills.
TheNDS evaluation and monitoring frameworkacknowledgesthis noting that,
while the evidence base on the ‘data skills gap’ in business is improving (including
throughwork commissioned by DCMS), ‘there are fewstanding metrics reported
on a regular basis’ and there is ‘limited evidence on the level of data skills in the
general population, and about the demographic breakdown of people with data
skills in the general workforce’.
There will be some usable, if limited, metrics available. These will include metrics
on individual training courses, such as completion rates, or detailed evaluations of
particular initiatives, such asthe current DCMS projectwith the OfSto improve
foundational data literacy on non-data university courses.
In a forthcoming conference paper, ‘Towards benchmarking data literacy’, the
5
ODI’s Calum Inverarity, Dr David Tarrant and Emilie Forrest, with Phil Greenwood
from Glacis, propose a framework to help individuals and teams assess their level
of data literacy:
5
Calum Inverarity, Dr David Tarrant, Emilie Forrest, and Phil Greenwood (20220, ‘Towards Benchmarking Data
Literacy’. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2022 (WWW ’22 Companion), April 25–29, 2022,
Virtual Event, Lyon, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government13

Figure 2: ODI Levels of Data Literacy
LevelCriteria
Below Level
1
Able to recall a single piece of specific information as presented
in a graph or chart. Not required to understand the structure or
meaning of the data.
Level 1Able to understand the meaning of information or data
presented to you.
Able to explain what a simple graph means.
Level 2Able to consider where the information has come from and how
this impacts the message being presented.
Able to paraphrase and make low-level inferences from data and
how it is presented.
Able to interpret data to state a new fact or existing one in a new
way.
Level 3Able to question the validity of claims, such as a misleading
graph, and can spot fake news.
Able to interrogate data and information from a variety of
sources.
Able to understand wider context and subtleties, and some
limitations or bias in how data is collected, used and shared.
Level 4Able to evaluate the methodology behind how the data was
collected and interpreted and what impact that has on the
conclusions drawn.
Able to bring together data from different sources or collected
with different methodologies to draw new conclusions and make
informed decisions about current or future direction.
Level 5Able to synthesise or create original ideas based upon a
thorough evaluation of a broad range of data/information
sources combined with specialist knowledge.
Able to recognise your own biases and limitations, as well as
those already present in the data/information resulting from how
it was originally collected or interpreted. Also able to recognise
what biases or limitations that might result in, including deeper
societal biases that might not have been corrected for, and take
appropriate steps to mitigate for that bias.
The authors note some of the problems with self-assessment – people will be
generous to themselves, and the wide range of topics covered by ‘data literacy’
means respondents will have their own interpretations of the necessary skills and
their relative importance, for example. But a framework such as this can help
individuals and organisations understand their basic literacy levels.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government14

Data literacy and other types of literacy
How the government defines ‘data literacy’ has a big impact: the UK public sector
is responsible formore than one sixthof all employmentin the UK, and what the
government does sets the example, policies and education and training provision
that others will follow and work with. In UK government documents, ‘data literacy’
is often used interchangeably or quickly elided with ‘data skills’. But there are also
other overlapping ‘literacies’ which feature in these documents. There is a risk of
fragmentation, duplication and contradiction in government’s work across these
different definitions if the government does not consider them – and where to
invest its time, attention and money – more coherently. Nonetheless, many of the
aspects of ‘data literacy’ are foundational to the other kinds of literacy.
Literacy and numeracy
It is worth acknowledging the even more foundational literacy and numeracy,
described by Prime Minister Boris Johnson as ‘the building blocks of a
world-class education’ which ‘unlock the learning, knowledge and skills that every
child needs to succeed in later life’ at the launch ofthe Schools White Paperin
March 2022. The ‘functional skills framework’ fromOfqual, the examination and
qualification regulator, includes English and mathematics alongside Information
and Communication Technology and ‘digital skills’ as ‘fundamental, applied
skills...which help people to gain the most from life,learning and work’. (‘Data
literacy’ would appear to be fundamental to most of these, but is not recognised
here as a fundamental skill in its own right.)
Financial literacy
There is also the widely-recognised ‘financial literacy’,defined by the European
Commissionas ‘the knowledge and skills needed tomake important financial
decisions’, witha recent grantfrom the government’sLevelling Up Fund for a
wellbeing and employment fund in the Scottish Borders aiming to improve
financial literacy alongside digital skills and mental health. Although GOV.UK
includes a2019 paper on financial literacy and conceptsin financial
decision-making(from the Foreign, Commonwealth andDevelopment Office), this
is an independent academic paper rather than government policy.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government15

Digital literacy
The main synonym or similar concept is ‘digital literacy’ (this features 142 times on
GOV.UK as of late March 2022, compared to 25 results for ‘data literacy’).
Although this term again lacks consistent definition, there are exceptions: ‘digital
literacy’ sometimes appears in assessments of new digital services, and the
Government Digital Service has a ‘digital inclusionscale’ which ranks users
according to their attitudes towards the internet (from ‘actively disengaged’ to
‘confident explorers’). Most uses of ‘digital literacy’ appear to refer to people’s
ability to use the internet and access online services – the 2022National Cyber
Security Strategyworries that ‘digital divides havealso created uneven access to
online services and exposed people to online abuse and harms due to limited
digital literacy and awareness of the cyber security measures we can all take to
stay secure online’. A 2021 report on ‘Harnessingtechnology for the long-term
sustainability of the UK’s healthcare system’ notedthat ‘support for those from
disadvantaged groups to improve their digital literacy and/or confidence in using
digital tools and equitable access to online services’ must be ‘placed at the heart
of the system’ if health inequalities are to be addressed. Digital exclusion –
including a lack of digital literacy – is a major theme of the CDEI’sAI Barometer
2020(it also identifies a lack of ‘public e-healthliteracy’, with people unable to
assess the reliability and accuracy of different online health information sources,
as a problem).Elsewhere, CDEI calls for regulatorsto better coordinate their digital
literacy campaigns. A2016 Reviewof publicly fundeddigital skills qualifications
argues that ‘digital literacy must be given the same importance as numeracy and
literacy’ and general digital skills should be integrated with technical and
professional progression routes. It also highlights the need for a shared language
and calls for government to take ‘completing the jigsaw’ seriously and ‘consider
how to bring together the findings of this and other reviews to deliver a coherent
flow of relevant digital skills for the UK economy’.
Parliamentarians – who tend not to talk much about data literacy – are also fans of
increased digital literacy. The Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee’s
2019 report on disinformation and ‘fake news’recommendsthat ‘digital literacy
should be a fourth pillar of education, alongside reading, writing and maths’. A
2017Lords select committee on growing up with theinternetalso supports digital
literacy as a fourth pillar of education and defines it as ‘the skills and knowledge to
critically understand the internet’ which is ‘vital for children to navigate the online
world’ and ‘an essential requirement of the future workforce’. In these examples
‘digital literacy’ seems to include how people navigate the online world, but not
the more basic digital skills (for example, being able to turn on and operate digital
devices) outlined in the government’s ownessentialdigital skills framework.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government16

Media literacy
There is a great deal of overlap between how ‘digital literacy’ is implicitly defined
and another term, ‘media literacy’ (80 results on GOV.UK). There is at least one
clear definition of this term from communications regulator Ofcom, that has a
statutory duty to promote media literacy, and defines it as ‘the ability to use,
understand and create media and communications in a variety of contexts’. It
publishes media literacy tracker surveys and runs a media literacy programme,
Making Sense of Media. A recentOfcom/LSE rapid evidenceassessmentin
2021 highlights three types of media literacy skills (critical thinking, evaluation
strategies, knowledge of operation of news and media industries) with a
consistently positive effect on engaging with misinformation. There is a fair
amount of discussion of media literacy in relation tothe Online Safety Bill–
which the 2021Online Media Literacy Strategycomesout of. This identifies
people understanding how personal data is used, and understanding how data
fits into algorithms and the wider operation of the online environment as two of
its five principles. Additionally, DCMS hasa collectionof online media literacy
resources, media literacy is mentioned in the 2021/22Digital Regulation
Cooperation Forum workplanand there is aMedia LiteracyTaskforce Steering
Board(GOV.UK lists its members but provides littlefurther information). It even
crops up in the government’s major foreign policy publication,Global Britain in a
Competitive Age: the Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development and
Foreign Policyin 2021, with a pledge to support itas part of tackling online
harms and disinformation.
Having heard various definitions, a 2018 Lords select committee report, on ‘digital
technology and the resurrection of trust’, actuallycombines and defines digital and
media literacy: ‘We use the term ‘digital media literacy’ because our purposes go
beyond, but do include, the functional skills required to use technology. We define
digital media literacy as being able to distinguish fact from fiction, including
misinformation, understand how digital platforms work, as well as how to exercise
one’s voice and influence decision makers in a digital context.’
AI literacy
Although ‘AI literacy’ doesn’t appear by itself, it appears as ‘AI and data literacy’ in
the 2021 AI Roadmapfrom the AI Council, a group ofindependent experts advising
government (discussed again below). Despite the risk of getting carried away with an
exciting and ‘shiny’ technology, the AI Roadmap provides some of the most holistic
thinking and substantial recommendations around data literacy. Some government
interviewees thought there was an advantage to talking about literacy attached to a
more exciting technology, as ‘you can use the shiny thing to get people interested in
the basics’. This may be especially important as people will not always know what
such terms mean, and can either dismiss the concept as ‘newfangled nonsense’ they
don’t need to think about, or become overenthusiastic about it as a ‘magic bullet’,
underlining the need for greater literacy.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government17

Other literacies
‘Statistical literacy’ makes a few appearances. It isdescribed by a former president
of the Royal Statistical Society as ‘an essential life skill: the need to make decisions
based on numerical data confronts us all in every aspect of our professional and
personal lives’; is referenced in government’s 2021Life Sciences Vision, which
demands ‘digital, computational and statistical literacy’; and the UK Statistics
Authority’s (UKSA) strategy for 2020 to 2025 ‘Statisticsfor the public good’, which
says the UKSA ought to advocate for greater statistical literacy, since ‘in our
data-rich society a good level of statistical literacy will help individuals deal with
their finances, understand risk or hold the powerful to account’. ‘Mathematical
literacy’ is mentioned a couple of times, notably in 2021’sQuantifying the UK Data
Skills Gap, where ‘a review of curriculum contentand mathematical literacy
demonstrates the need for rapid change to ensure a ‘fully data-literate population’.
‘Information literacy’ also features on GOV.UK, particularly in the context of libraries
– includingplans to support library workersteachmembers of the public about it as
part of the Online Media Literacy Strategy. There are also a few mentions of ‘tech
literacy’, which does not appear to be defined anywhere on GOV.UK.
Conversations with people in government also introduced ‘analytical literacy’ and
‘evaluation literacy’. The latter appears in a 2021 report by the National Audit
Office,Evaluating government spending, which arguesthe use of evaluation
across government is ‘variable and inconsistent’ and that part of the problem is
officials lacking the ‘evaluation literacy’ to understand evidence before making
decisions. The analysis function and policy profession are conducting an audit to
understand what skills there are.
‘Cyber literacy’ gets a solitary mention on GOV.UK – in an assessment of a new
‘Report A Cyber Incident’ service which says that‘the team should look more at
users with low cyber literacy’ – but cyber skills are also moving up the government
agenda (as seen in this consultation oncyber skills,and the provision of theCyber
Explorerslearning platform).
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government18

How these overlapping literacies relate to the ODI framework
Like the ODI, the Good Things Foundation, inits reporton digital inclusion and
online safety, has noticed these overlaps. (The GoodThings Foundation defines
data literacy as ‘people’s understanding of the value of their personal data, how it
is used and how to control this’, rather than people’s ability to interpret data.) It
argues that ‘the types of literacy which citizens need today are more complex than
even a couple of years ago’, and quotes the University of Liverpool that the
different types of digital and data literacy citizens need, involve ‘not only being
able to read and verify news and content, but also, understand the technical and
media economics of digital platforms, how they are funded, what their different
features and affordances mean and how they function, how to change their
privacy and content settings and importantly their individual and collective rights’.
The skills involved in thinking about, understanding and using data that underpin
and define the many other related ‘literacies’ are complex and various. TheODI
understanding of ‘data literacy’– including comparingand contrasting how
different people use data, evaluating the impact of bias and sampling, and
examining how and why data is collected – is also key to making sense of all of
these definitions and how they work together. Our definition of data literacy
doesn't just overlap with these other types of literacy, it is fundamental to
understanding them, as highlighted by the variety of hexagons in the ODI’s Data
Skills Framework and the forthcoming conference paper authored by members of
the ODI team.
Definitions of ‘digital literacy’ in particular tend to engage the hexagons on the
right-hand side of our Data Skills Framework (the more technical and practical
skills involved in data analysis and engineering). Where that overlaps with media
literacy and internet use, it tends to engage the hexagons on the left-hand side
(those more critical, contextual and strategic skills that might be involved in data
literacy), literacy-related hexagons come into play. The AI Roadmap’s definition
covers both sides, while two of the AI Strategy’s ways of thinking about skills –
using and inspiring – also engage some of the left-hand side. The various
definitions also engage different levels of the ODI Levels of Data Literacy, with
some saying everyone should have some level of familiarity, and others – such as
analytical and evaluation literacy – perhaps focusing more on seasoned
professionals.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government19

Chapter 2: Data literacy
and the UK government
How the government defines data literacy shapes everything from the foundational
and advanced education, training and support it makes available, to how other
organisations think about data literacy. The challenges government faces in using
data will be faced by other organisations too – and how government frames,
conceptualises and counters these challenges will lead others by example.
There is no single, consistent definition of ‘data literacy’ in use by the UK
government. Its NDS, for example, states ‘there is no widely agreed definition of
data skills’.
Speaking to those in government working on data skills and data literacy elicits
various working definitions of data literacy. These are often focused on evidence and
analysis for policymaking, and such stakeholders readily acknowledge ‘data literacy’
isn’t properly defined anywhere. Our interviewees offered definitions including:
●
Data literate people are those confident enough to ask the right questions
about the data, understand what they can and can’t do with it, and
appreciate that data is always a story – none of it is perfect, so they must
understand where it has come from and what it really means
●We should take a further step back and ask why we think data literacy is
necessary, to which the answer is that government needs people to
understand data, especially from a policymaking point of view
●On a practical level, people need to be data literate to understand whether
the evidence backs up their argument, or not
●Data literacy is ‘the ability to analyse evidence; take the right conclusions
from it or understand when you can’t take certain conclusions from it; be
able to spot when the data informing evidence is patchy, biased or
non-authoritative; be able to spot when you can’t make informed
decisions based on the data presented; and be able to articulate all of
those things.’
These definitions tend to match up with a large part of the right-hand side of the
ODI’s Data Skills Framework, around data analysis, although they also raise
aspects of leadership (which is explored on the left-hand side), particularly
thinking about developing policy and acting upon data. In understanding the
imperfections and limitations of data, there is also implicit engagement with
‘working ethically’. The need for everyone to have some data literacy in these
definitions means that it engages the ODI Levels of Data Literacy from the lowest
levels upwards.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government20

In the National Data Strategy
While acknowledging the lack of widely agreed definitions,the NDSuses ‘data
skills’ to
broadly to cover the full range of basic, technical, governance and other
skills – including project management, governance and problem solving –
needed by practitioners to maximise the usefulness of data
and ‘basic data literacy’ as requiring
some knowledge of data uses, some ability to assess the quality of data
and its application, and the skills to conduct basic analysis...[w]hile we do
not all need to become data scientists, everyone needs some level of data
literacy in order to operate successfully in increasingly data-rich
environments.
Although the NDS notes that the education system needs to better prepare
everyone for ‘increasingly data-rich lives and careers’, the emphasis of much of the
document is on the latter – data-rich careers, rather than data-rich lives. There is a
focus on ensuring industry has a ready supply of people with specialist data skills,
and that the workforce as a whole has some level of data literacy: for example, ‘it is
important for the UK to have data skills capabilities in companies, from basic data
literacy to advanced technical skills’ and ‘in the future, the use of data in our work
must become the norm, rather than the exclusive domain of specialists.’
In the wider public sector, the NDS says the ‘lack of a mature data culture’ stems
from ‘a fragmentation of leadership and a lack of depth in data skills at all levels’. It
also cites an overemphasis on the risks of misusing data leading to ‘a chronic
underuse of data and a woeful lack of understanding of its value’.
In its May 2021response to the consultation on theNDS, the government notes that
those responding to the consultation ‘underlined the importance of building a culture
of data literacy across government’, with 40% of respondents identifying ‘capability,
leadership and culture as a key government priority’. This was highlighted not only in
senior leaders – including politicians – needing the data skills to ‘promote and
champion’ data in their departments, ‘but also more generally in that all civil servants
and public sector workers should have a foundational level of data literacy’. However,
there is no detail on what such a foundational level should look like and little extra
information on how greater data literacy in government might be achieved (other than
the critical role of a government Chief Data Officer in driving a ‘culture of data-driven
decision making’).
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government21

As mentioned above, the DCMS honesty in acknowledging the challenges of
defining data literacy and data skills via the NDS extends to its draft September
2021monitoring and evaluation frameworkpolicy paper.As well as noting that the
good evidence base on the ‘data skills gap’ in business is not matched by standing
metrics or evidence on skills in the general population, it says it would like better
measures on success in hiring more civil servants with data skills and ‘training more
civil service leaders to understand the potential of data’. Data literacy isn’t explicitly
mentioned.
Part of the evidence base on the ‘data skills gap’ comes from a 2021 report
commissioned by DCMS, onQuantifying the UK Data SkillsGap. This
concentrates on better data literacy and more data skills in the workforce. It lists
‘data literacy’ as number six on its list of the top ten things companies need to
improve.   Several of the other areas for improvement, such as information
management, knowledge of emerging technologies and solutions, data
communication skills, data ethics, analysis skills and analytical mindset, would be
covered by definitions of ‘data literacy’, including the ODI’s. While also
acknowledging the lack of agreed definitions around data skills – noting narrow
definitions that focus on technical skills, and more comprehensive ones
incorporating ‘other skills that help to interpret data’ – it attempts a brief definition
of data literacy as the ‘ability to draw information out of data and turn it into
actionable knowledge’, which would put it at Level 4 on the ODI’s Levels of Data
Literacy (‘using data to make informed decisions’). The report alsocites a
definition of data literacyfrom a 2016 journal article:‘a specific skill set and
knowledge base, which empowers individuals to transform data into information
and actionable knowledge by enabling them to access, interpret, critically assess,
manage and ethically use data’.
The NDS and related documents, then, are clear on the importance of data literacy,
give some sense of the topics it might cover, and acknowledge the lack of
consistent definitions of data literacy and data skills. But they do not attempt a
definitive definition or conflate literacy with other data skills (which would fall under
‘literacy’ under the ODI and others definitions), and tend to focus on data literacy
being important for the workforce rather than wider society.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government22

In the National AI Strategy
The government’sNational AI Strategy, published bytheOffice for Artificial
Intelligence,Department for Digital, Culture, Media& Sport, andDepartment for
Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, focuses onspecialist skills, but does touch on
data literacy. It takes a three-pronged approach to skills:
●
‘build’, to attract ‘top talent’ and ‘train and attract the brightest and best
people at developing AI’ through interventions at PhD and master’s levels;
●‘use’, which includes a pledge to ‘empower employers and employees to
upskill and understand the opportunities for using AI in a business setting’;
and
●‘inspire’, which includes ensuring that ‘programmes that engage children with
AI concepts are accessible and reach the widest demographic’ through the
National Centre for Computing Education (NCCE).
In other documents
Several other government documents cover similar ground, underlining the
importance of data literacy for all (especially at work) without ever quite defining it.
The 2019Government Technology Innovation Strategypledged to ‘create
data-literate civil servants through world-class training’ and help ‘to develop both
data specialists, and data skills among non-specialists’, including courses that
would ‘help decision-makers appreciate the power of data in government
transformation and how best to work effectively with data professionals’. The 2017
to 2020Government Transformation Strategyincludeda pledge to ‘increase
awareness of data, building on fundamental data literacy to help public servants
access rich datasets and make evidence-based, data-driven decisions’. The
Wade-Gery review‘Putting data, digital and tech atthe heart of transforming the
NHS’ highlights concern about digital inequality – noting worries about the
unintended consequence of digital transformation, such as excluding ‘those who
are less digitally literate’ or with poor access to telecom services. It recommends
NHS services ‘build basic data and digital literacy and capability at all levels’ as
‘understanding the importance of data and digital and being able to use them
effectively must become a requirement for staff’.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government23

A 2021speech by Julia LopezMP, then the ministerresponsible for digital
government, underlined that ‘we need digital skills and understanding across all
levels of government – we need to bring everyone along on this journey. So
improving the digital and data literacy of all civil servants and members of
government, particularly senior leaders, is crucial to realising the ambition of
having world leading digital services and the next phase of digital transformation’.
(TheNAO’s 2019 report on data sharingacross governmentalso notes that
‘departments need to have skills at several levels: to understand how to use
legislation appropriately for legitimate data-sharing; to know the limitations of the
data they hold; and what is needed to fix the problems. Those at senior levels
need to understand the implications of poor data to help provide the influence at
higher levels and gain traction for improvements’.)
There are some calls for government to take a more active role in fostering data
literacy. Several respondents toa consultation onpart of the Data Protection Act
‘called for a more effective data literacy strategy, starting with education in
schools about data rights and redress mechanisms’. A minority of respondents to
a consultation on the CDEIalso suggested it mighthave ‘a role in delivering
education and data literacy campaigns, to ensure the public is able to engage with
the issues in an informed manner’. TheLords selectcommittee on AIcalled on
public sector organisations to collaborate with civil society organisations and the
private sector to ‘improve digital understanding and data literacy across society,
as these are the foundations upon which knowledge about AI is built’.
The idea that data literacy should extend to all citizens is not a new one. The 2013
UK data capability strategy: seizing the data opportunityhas ‘human capital’ as
one of its three overarching aspects to data capability, and defines ‘human capital’
as a skilled workforce and data-confident citizens. Although the strategy does not
refer to this as ‘data literacy’, its view of skills includes business managers being
aware of how data analytics can transform business, so it goes beyond technical
data skills, and it asserts ‘all UK citizens should have an understanding of data –
how it is created and stored – and confidence in its use and their rights’.
Also noteworthy is a service assessment – a key milestone in the development of
a new digital public service – for ‘Use land and propertydata’ from 2018. The
service failed to meet its alpha stage assessment (alpha being the prototype and
ideas stage) because more user research was needed on users with lower data
literacy – but the assessment complimented the service team on developing
different personas (fictionalised versions of users) to explore different levels of
data literacy.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government24

The devolved nations also have some definitions. Scotland’sData Labis a partner
inData Skills for Work, which uses the definitionof one of the other partners, Qlik:
‘Data literacy is the ability to read, work with, analyse and communicate with data.
It's a skill that empowers all levels of workers to ask the right questions of data
and machines, build knowledge, make decisions, and communicate meaning to
others’. The Scottish government’s ‘A changing nation:how Scotland will thrive in
a digital world’ also says: ‘We must also widen thedefinition of digital literacy to
include a focus on both cognitive and technical skills, so our people are able to
use technology collaboratively to find and evaluate information and to
communicate ideas creatively’.
In Wales, theCurriculum for Walesincludes ‘digitalcompetence’ under its
‘cross-curricular skills and integral skills’, where contributions to work can include
‘capturing and interrogating data, recognising and evaluating computational
processes, designing and expressing learners’ thinking using digital devices and
systems’. One suggested content area is ‘storing and processing data’ as ‘through
data literacy and data management, learners can better understand how data
drives our computational world’. A2020 OECD assessmentof Northern Ireland’s
approach to skills recommends revising part of the curriculum ‘to focus on the
development of digital and data literacy skills’.
Some of these documents, then, have a greater appreciation of the role of data
literacy in society, as well as the economy. Some recognise the need for data literacy
for all – including both senior leaders and non-specialists in data. But again there is
little detail on what data literacy involves and how to go about developing it.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government25

In individual government departments
Individual departments are developing their own approaches to data literacy,
which recognise the need for all staff to have an understanding of data and its
uses. TheData Strategy for Defencesays all personnel(including ‘data and
non-data professions’) will ‘complete mandatory data literacy training across
Defence skills frameworks to develop a Defence-wide digital and data literate
organisation’, and wants ‘expert data professionals, alongside all personnel being
data-literate and data-aware’. It adds: ‘This will allow personnel to focus on what
they were employed to do – make informed and effective decisions’, noting ‘data
literacy skills will be recognised as fundamental as weapon handling, with data as
the lifeblood of operations and the firm base’. TheHome Office’s Digital, Data and
Technology 2024 Strategyprioritises ‘improving dataliteracy across our
organisation and creating a familiarity that helps people gain confidence using and
handling it’. It states that staff in all of its business areas should understand what
answers their strategic datasets can provide, and staff who handle and rely on
data ‘should understand their legal obligations and be aware of how to find,
collect, store and share [data] securely’ and ‘be familiar with its provenance and
know which strategic data sets are important for answering critical questions’.
The Home Office’s reference to staff understanding their legal obligations raises
questions about a particular form of data literacy (which might fit under ‘developing
policy’ or ‘governing access’ in the ODI’s framework, on the left-hand side among
other strategic, contextual skills): how aware are staff of the various data-related
laws and regulations they are operating under? The government consultation on
‘Data: A new direction’ lists the eleven pieces oflegislationthe ICO is responsible
for enforcing, including GDPR, the Data ProtectionAct, the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive) Regulations, the Freedom of Information Act and the
Re-use of Public Sector Information Regulations, and there will be other legislation
integral to civil servants in their daily work (such as the Public Records Act). There
are also various other frameworks and pieces of guidance (such as the
government’s ownData Ethics Framework) availableto support public servants in
their work. But it is unclear to what extent most parts of government consider
awareness of these legal obligations to be part of data literacy, and to what extent
resources to understand them all are made available (although ‘understanding the
Data Protection Act’ is part of theFundamentals ofWorking in Government stream
of the new government curriculum – see below).
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government26

How these definitions relate to the ODI framework
There are two obvious similarities between the various government definitions of
‘data literacy’ and the way the ODI thinks about it. The first is that ‘literacy’ goes
beyond merely technical skills to understanding some of the context of data being
used (particularly in making policy and other decisions). The second is that literacy
is something that everyone, not just data specialists, should possess. But most
government documents tend to focus on the economic opportunities rather than the
wider societal implications. And there is relatively little detail about exactly what
government intends to do to develop or improve data literacy, and no systematic
exploration of the subjects that should be covered or the expectations for a digitally
literate population or workforce that needs to be met.
On the lack of definition, it would appear the Central Digital and Data Office (CDDO)
is on the case. Inan update to parliament’s PublicAdministration and Constitutional
Affairs Committee, Cabinet Office notes that the CDDO‘is developing and piloting a
‘Digital and Data Criterion’ that defines the skills and behaviours, associated with
data literacy and digital orientation, required of Senior Civil Servants (SCS) across all
professions (for example Commercial, HR, and Operational Delivery). This forms the
foundation of our training needs analysis and development of critical learning
products’. Again, though, this may not clarify or spell out the need for a required
level of data literacy for civil servants at all levels.
How others think about data literacy
The UK government and the ODI are not the first organisations to think about ‘data
literacy’ and how to define it. The forthcoming conference paper authored by
members of the ODI team notes there has been considerable discussion in academia,
and these discussions are starting to evolve from a focus on the skills needed by
students and researchers, to the needs of wider society. Even if disagreements about
precise definitions remain, there is at least a body of work to draw on which can be
used to bring structure to conversations around data literacy.
The authors quote a definition byWolff et althat:
‘Data literacy is the ability to ask and answer real world questions from
large and small data sets through an inquiry process, with consideration of
ethical use of data. It is based on core practical and creative skills, with the
ability to extend knowledge of specialist data handling skills according to
goals. These include the abilities to select, clean, analyse, visualise,
critique and interpret data, as well as to communicate stories from data
and to use data as part of a design process.’
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government27

Arguably, this can still be interpreted as a narrow and technical definition, missing
some of the wider contextual points (such as the impact on society) of the ODI
definition. Other, wider definitions sometimes distinguish between ‘active’ skills
(those involved in actually doing things with the data) and ‘passive’ ones (which
speak to being able to contextualise the data). A concept note by the OECD on
core foundations for education and skills for 2030underlines the importance of
technical and social aspects of data with a definition by Carlson et al: ‘Data
literacy is the ability to derive meaningful information from data, the ability to read,
work with, analyse and argue with data, and understand “what data mean,
including how to read charts appropriately, draw correct conclusions from data,
and recognise when data are being used in misleading or inappropriate ways”’.
Wolff et al’s approach, which includes collecting and sorting existing definitions,
allows them to think about data literacy from different perspectives:
●
Different points in an analysis cycle.This includesthe PPDAC approach
used for statistical thinking in New Zealand – Problem, Plan, Data,
Analysis, and Conclusion
●Different interactions with or uses of data in different contexts.They
give the examples of data as evidence, data as a tool for innovation, and
data literacy for job opportunities
●Different types of data literate citizen.In advancingorder of required
literacy, these are the reader (consumes data), the communicator (can talk
to others about it), the maker (works with data) and the scientist (higher
level engagement).
Some of these approaches to thinking about data literacy can be found elsewhere.
Take the different personas or types of data literate citizen. In 2014 theUK Digital
Skills Taskforcedistinguished between ‘digital citizens’,‘digital workers’ and
‘digital makers’;Data Skills for Work, an ongoinginitiative involving the Scottish
government’sData Lab, among other partners, differentiatesbetween ‘data
citizens’, ‘data workers’, ‘data professionals’, and ‘data leaders’; andthis 2018
ONS blogpost looks at an attempt to develop a ‘data literacy scale’which divided
the potential audience into ‘beginners’, ‘readers/explorers’, ‘makers,
‘communicators’, ‘scientists’, and ‘pioneers’. This also comes through from
government’s various literacy and skills training offers: those developing training
appreciate that more junior staff and senior leaders will have different needs and
expectations, and there will be differences between initiatives aimed at basic,
day-to-day understanding of data and targeted interventions such as helping
members of public sector boards scrutinise the systems they are responsible for.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government28

A prominent example of thinking about literacy through different situations or tasks
is the University of Liverpool’s currentMe and MyBig Data – Developing Citizens’
Data Literaciesproject. The project’sData CitizenshipFrameworkgroups 21 key
components of data literacy (outlined by previous work) under the three headings
of ‘data doing’ (such as creating, visualising and interpreting data), ‘data thinking’
(awareness of rights, understanding data society) and ‘data participation’
(engaging with debates, participating in society using data, activism). This speaks
to a tension mentioned in our stakeholder interviews: an acknowledged need for
general data literacy, but an inability to bring data literacy to life, or target learning
interventions to achieve it outside specific, predominantly professional, contexts,
which may explain why data literacy in professional work contexts is often
prominent in the literature.
In the AI Roadmap
One hypothesis we had at the start of this project was that the UK government might
be neglecting basic data literacy for its workforce in favour of ostensibly more
exciting skills around AI. It’s ironic then, that one of the most holistic and thoughtful
explorations of ‘data literacy’ is found in the 2021AI Roadmapfromthe AI Council.
This is an independent committee of experts ‘set up to provide advice to the
Government and high-level leadership of the AI ecosystem’. One of its 16
recommendations is to ‘commit to achieving data and AI literacy for everyone’, which
sits alongside two other recommendations on ‘skills and diversity’, one dealing with
‘high-level AI skill building’ and the other with prioritising diversity and inclusion
within the field. This is an holistic view which brings together skills for all, specialist
skills and the importance of diverse perspectives.
The council’s roadmap argues that ‘the public needs to understand the risks and
rewards of AI so they can be confident and informed users’ and recommends an
online academy for understanding AI, with ‘trusted materials and initiatives’ to
support teachers, school students and lifelong learning. It argues ‘every child
[should] leave school with a basic sense of how AI works’, and that this basic
sense should go beyond ‘the basics of coding or quantitative reasoning’,
describing mathematical concepts and understanding ethics to include ‘knowing
enough to be a conscious and confident user of AI-related products; to know what
questions to ask, what risks to look out for, what ethical and societal implications
might arise, and what kinds of opportunities AI might provide’. It highlights the risk
that, without this basic AI literacy, ‘the UK will miss out on opportunities created
by AI applications, and will be vulnerable to poor consumer and public
decision-making, and the dangers of over-persuasive hype or misplaced fear’.
Ongoing resources to support public engagement could even underpin future
regulatory infrastructure ‘by ensuring that public debates were consistently
well-informed’, building public trust and allowing informed scrutiny.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government29

How other definitions relate to the ODI framework
Although they approach it in slightly different ways, a general similarity between
these definitions and the ODI framework is the importance of context, and the
wider, non-technical considerations about how data is used and its impact in
particular scenarios (those elements that are highlighted in the hexagons on the
left-hand side of the ODI Data Skills Framework). Framing data literacy, for
example by looking at where it sits in the data cycle, or the different types of tasks
that may be undertaken or data citizen who may undertake them, also underlines
that different people may need different types and levels of data literacy skills at
different times.
Additionally, a constant theme in the wider literature which fits with ODI (and
indeed, government) thinking is the need for both a group of people with
specialist, technical skills, and for the broader population to have some grounding
in data literacy, engaging both the lowest and highest levels of the ODI Levels of
Data Literacy. This dual need is present in everything from theRoyal Statistical
Society’s Data Manifestoto theBritish Academy’sCount Us Inreport, to theRoyal
Society’s Dynamics of data science skills report.InDoteveryone’s famous phrase,
‘digital understanding is not about being able to code, it’s about being able to
cope’.
Some of those reports explore the balance between those specialist skills being
mainly of use for the economy, while the more general data literacy can also
benefit individuals as citizens (for example, helping them navigate information in
their personal or civic lives). Interestingly, some of the reports government cites as
being influential – for example,Analytic Britain:Securing the right skills for the
data-driven economyby Nesta and Universities UK –have more focus on
specialist skills (in the Analytic Britain example, trying to find data scientists who
can combine technical, analytical, industry, business and other soft skills and
knowledge).
Perhaps the most developed approach to data literacy – the AI Roadmap’s
three-way model of general literacy, specialist skills and diversity and inclusion,
with data literacy in the general population being vital for understanding,
supporting and even regulating innovation with data and AI – has unfortunately
not been fully adopted by government.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government30

Chapter 3: Public sector
data literacy initiatives
for government
‘We need to transform the way data is collected, managed, used and
shared across government, including with the wider public sector, and
create joined-up and interoperable data infrastructure. We need the right
skills and leadership to understand and unlock the potential of data.’
Mission 3: Transforming government’s use of data,National Data Strategy
‘Perhaps most importantly, government must also ask itself if its people
have the skills necessary for the challenges that I have set out.’
Michael Gove,‘The privilege of public service’, 2020
Recent years have brought renewed focus within government on improving
specialist skills throughthe ‘functional agenda’.Data (and digital) skills are part of
this, but have also been given fresh impetus by the centrality of data to the
government’s pandemic response, and plans to increase data sharing between
government departments (and between government and other sectors) in theData:
A new direction consultationand elsewhere. This isalso a longstanding challenge:
theNational Audit Office’s 2019 report on data sharingacross government notes:
‘departments need to have skills at several levels: to understand how to use
legislation appropriately for legitimate data-sharing; to know the limitations of the
data they hold; and what is needed to fix the problems. Those at senior levels need
to understand the implications of poor data to help provide the influence at higher
levels and gain traction for improvements’.
The government has made clear commitments to improve the data literacy of the
public sector workforce. Data is one of the areas identified in the 2021Declaration
on Government Reformwhere the government should developexpertise. Mission
3 of the NDS, to transform government’s use of data, includes several pledges on
data literacy and data skills, many of them working with (what is now) the CDDO
and other government organisations to improve data skills across the public
sector. Those pledges include training analysts in data science (exceeding the
target, according tothe government’s NDS consultationresponse) and delivering
the range of actions to be outlined in the (completed but unpublished) Public
Sector Data Capability Audit. They also include extending the data training offer to
public servants. Further measures are also promised as part of the NDS, originally
due in autumn 2020 but not yet launched.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government31

And withmore than a sixthof all workers in the UKemployed by the public sector,
the UK government’s approach to upskilling its workforce will have a wider effect on
the whole economy (Mission 1 of the NDS, to unlock the value of data across the
economy, as well as Mission 3 on government’s own use of data).
How training, learning and development works
inside government
TheGSCUwas set up as part of the Cabinet Officein September 2020, following
the Ditchley Lecture given by Michael Gove (then Minister for the Cabinet Office,
responsible for the civil service and how government operates).
It brings together various learning and training initiatives across government,
including new ones like the curriculum and (online) campus for government skills,
and existing ones that include:
●
various Accelerated Development Schemes (like the Fast Stream for
graduates, or Future Leaders Schemes for high-performing civil servants
below the senior civil service level),
●
the Leadership Academy (which aims to ‘to accelerate the development of
the knowledge, skills, networks and professional practice of all civil
servants), the National Leadership Centre (which supports leaders and
leadership practice across the wider public sector), and the Civil Service
Leadership Group (a network of the so-called ‘top 200’ senior leaders
across government) which will all form part of the Leadership College for
Government, and
●
‘central learning frameworks’ like Civil Service Learning (a longstanding
platform through which civil servants can access training courses).
Thevariousfunctions and professionsacross governmentalso have a vital
role in developing and training civil servants. Senior politicians and officials and
seasoned Whitehall watchers have long argued for the need to value civil
servants with specialist skills as well as policy ‘generalists’ (who tend to move
roles, jobs and policy areas more frequently). ‘Professions’ cover civil servants
with particular professional skills, such as social research, science and
engineering, and policy, while ‘functions’ relate to civil servants helping the
government perform certain tasks it is responsible for, such as analysis,
commercial or digital. These all have their own career frameworks, professional
standards, networks (such as a cross-government working group with heads of
data science), and their own training and development initiatives. The  GSCU’s
fourth curriculum strand on specialist skills links to these initiatives, and
professions and functions sometimes have their own training institutions like the
Government Digital Service Academy for the digital, data and technology
profession.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government32

There will also beother initiativesacross government.Each government
department and organisations across the public sector (including local government
and organisations in the health service) are likely to have their own resources to
support their own needs. There will also be private providers of training support to
the government, operating within the Civil Service Learning and other frameworks –
departments currently spendaround £300m a yearontraining. As well as the ODI,
these providers include the Civil Service College – which acquired many of the
courses run by the National School for Government, the part of Cabinet Office
which ran training for the civil service before it was abolished in 2010, and is now a
private provider with no government involvement.
Curriculum and campus
A January 2021 report,Better Training, Knowledgeand Networks: the New
Curriculum and Campus for Government Skills, outlineskey thinking around the
role of the GSCU’s approach to training and skills. The curriculum has five strands,
from which civil servants can ‘pick and mix’ training courses.
Given that a foreword by Alex Chisholm, the Chief Operating Officer for the civil
service, highlights ‘the Civil Service’s grasp of science and data’ as one of the
‘gaps in universal administrative core abilities and highly technical expertise’, it is
perhaps unsurprising that most of these strands have components dedicated to
data (and data literacy, even if they are not defined as such).
The five curriculum strands are:
●
The Foundations of Public Administration, which isuniversal training in
and knowledge of essential skills for public servants to which every new
entrant is entitled. Several of the ‘fundamentals’ relate to data, including
‘Data handling and interpretation’ and ‘Data Masterclass for senior
leaders’ (more on this below), as well as ‘Basic digital skills suite – Excel,
PowerPoint, social media’, ‘Analysing evidence’, and ‘Quality of evidence’.
●Working in Government, a ‘comprehensive groundingin the history and
structure of government and how it works with the rest of the public
sector’ and developing skills to make practical use of that knowledge. The
‘fundamentals’ here include ‘Working with data’, ‘Data protection’, ‘The
Treasury Green Book’ (which provides guidance on appraising, monitoring
and evaluating policies and programmes), ‘Government finance’ and
‘Science in the Civil Service’.
●Leading and Managing, including relevant practicalskills expected of
those with leadership and management responsibilities.
●Specialist Skills, which is ‘training by the professions,for the professions’.
●Domain Knowledge, or developing and honing knowledgespecific to a
specialist area such as health, education or transport.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government33

Functions and professions
The fourth strand of the curriculum, Specialist Skills, links to the offers from the various
professions and functions. These are aimed at the members of those groups – with
some resources widely available, while others may be restricted.
TheAnalysis Functionbrings together several analyticalprofessions in
government, including geographers, actuaries, social researchers, operational
researchers, statisticians, economists, data scientists and analysts. Itsmissionis
‘to support everyone in government to make better decisions so that policy and
operations, deliver value for money and improve the lives of the people of the UK’.
It is very active in supporting this mission – for example, it hostsAnalysis in
Government Month, consisting of events highlightingand celebrating work and
bringing together analysts from across the public sector. Itstraining offeringis one
of the more open, and impressive. Itslearning curriculumclaims it has something
for everyone, ‘whether... you’re a member of one (or more) of the analytical
professions or not’; even thefunctional standard,which sets expectations for
planning and delivering analytical work in government, includes resources that
could fall under a data literacy heading (such as details of different practices, ways
of thinking about analysis and a cycle of how a process should work).
Its curriculum, courses and resources are splitintoAbility (learn how to do
something), Technical (get better at something), Behaviours (change a behaviour),
Strengths (learn from experience/strengths of others), and Experience (experience
something that will help me grow). ‘Ability’, for example, provides links to various
standards, guidance (for example, government’s data ethics framework) and
training (for example, an introduction to GDPR).
The other data- and information-related professions are a mixed bag in terms of
what they provide. TheGovernment Statistical Servicehasan impressive array of
links to courses and resources– some of which appearaccessible to those
outside the statistical professions.Digital, dataand technologylinks tovarious
GDS Academy courses, some of which – such as ‘introducingthe basics of
Artificial Intelligence in government’ – would belongunder a banner of data
literacy.A document on continuing professional developmentfor the knowledge
and information management profession includes various links – for example, on
‘knowledge principles for government’ – that could be useful in thinking about
data literacy. Others – such as theGovernment EconomicsServiceand
Government Social Research Service– have their resourcesbehind logins.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government34

One civil service profession where data literacy is vital is thepolicy profession,
which includes the nearly 30,000 civil servants tasked with developing and
delivering public policy. The policy profession, with support from the analysis
function, has been taking the challenge seriously: one of the twelve standards  in
thepolicy profession competency frameworkis ‘data,analysis and scientific
advice’, which requires policy professionals to be able to ‘apply research methods
to model, test and improve policy solutions’ and ‘commission, understand and use
data, evidence, and advice’ from analytical, scientific and technical sources. The
profession’s training prospectusincludes nine hoursof workshops on ‘data and
analysis’ with this blurb: ‘The growth of open data has changed how data is
collected and analysed, allowing managers, analysts and policy professionals to
change how they make decisions. In this topic you will explore how data, and
specifically open data, can be used to improve policy development and
implementation. You will also explore how to interpret data accurately and how to
communicate data effectively.’ The Analysis Function is also currentlyundertaking
an auditof analytical skills among policy officials,which is expected to conclude
(with actions) shortly.
Data masterclasses
‘Listening to data starts at the top’ according to an adageattributed to Amazon
founder, Jeff Bezos.
Reading through civil service training material and speaking to those involved in
supporting data literacy in government, one initiative was front and centre: the
Data Masterclasses for Senior Leaders.
The masterclasses have been described byone of theircreators at GSCU and
10DS(the Number 10 Data Science unit) as an‘unusually-accessible,
exceptionally-engaging and deeply-vocational online courseto help equip
non-analyst senior leaders across government with the knowledge and skills
they need to put data and evidence at the heart of their work’. They involve
videos of some high profile speakers (including National Statistician Sir Ian
Diamond, mathematician and author Hannah Fry, and Professor Sir David
Spiegelhalter), case studies of ‘exemplary’ data use in government, and quizzes
and calibration tests. They cover:
●
data-driven decision-making and policy-making
●communicating compelling narratives through data
●data science and new frontiers.
Interviewees inside government also highlighted the importance of each student
being part of a cohort they could learn and discuss with.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government35

The Masterclasses started in 2021 with senior civil servants – the idea being that
upskilling senior leaderswould drive demand for betteruse of data and evidence
across government – but have since been rolled out more widely, including now
being part of the Fast Stream induction, and inspired similar courses on innovation
and demographics. The ONS Data Science Campus has since taken ownership of
the programme.
In its first year, more than 3,000 learners enrolled(28 cohorts from 26 departments),
with a completion rate of 26% (compared to an industry standard of 12.6%).
Other initiatives
The National Health Service (NHS) is also thinking about its data literacy offering.
TheNHS Leadership Academyiscurrently conductingresearchon the question,
‘What are the gaps in data literacy in Health and Care leaders and what training
requirements will support evidence use in decision making?’ TheAnalyst X
communityis researching the needs of those engagedwith analysis in the NHS.
TheWhat Good Looks Likeframework – which NHS leadersshould use to ensure
their organisation and local health system is ready for digital transformation –
includes a success measure of supporting people: ‘Your workforce is digitally
literate and are able to work optimally with data and technology’. There is an
‘Information, Data and Content’ domainwithinHealthEducation England’s work
on the ‘digital literacy of the wider workforce’. The NHS isusing the apprenticeship
levy‘to upskill the wider workforce in data literacy’as well as developing more
advanced skills. Andthe Goldacre Reviewinto theuse of health data, published in
April 2022, includes a recommendation to ‘Create training specifically for senior
leaders to help them become better customers for data analysis’, since there
should be an expectation that non-analyst staff, especially those in management
positions, should ‘have sufficient data literacy to conduct informed conversations
about data’.
One major data literacy example in the health service is the ‘Making Data Count’
initiative run by NHS England and NHS Improvement, which provides practical
guides and training ‘for those working at all levels in the NHS, from ward to board’
claiming to show participants ‘how to make better use’ of their data. It includes
supporting staff and boards to understand ‘statistical process control’ – using
averages and upper and lower limits to analyse performance and whether targets
will be met.
TheGovernment Data Quality Hub, based at the ONS,focused on working with
producers of statistics to improve their quality in its old guise as the Government
Statistical Service Quality Centre. But it now aims ‘to improve the qualityof all
types of data and analysis across government... by supporting organisations to
better understand, communicate and improve the quality of their data and their
analysis’. It produces resources, including aframework,to understand data
quality, and runs a training course on the basics ofdata quality. Itsmaturity
framework– being trialled – also has an expansiveview of how organisations
approach data, looking at uses, leadership, culture and skills (which asks ‘how
data literate are your staff?’). The Hub also worked with theData Standards
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government36

Authorityat the CDDO to organiseDataConnect21, a series of events aimed at
everyone ‘from the most technical data expert who wants to talk about good
dataset design, through to leaders who want to understand more about putting
data at the heart of their organisation’. This is just one example of CDDO and
others understanding the value ofnetworks and communitiesin fostering
relationships and learning across government.
And in its major 2019 report onthe challenges ofdata across government, the
National Audit Office mentions training provided by the Ministry of Housing,
Communities & Local Government (now the Department for Levelling Up, Housing
and Communities) for chief executives and political leaders in local authorities ‘to
help support better use of digital services across local areas’.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government37

One initiative, from outside government but aimed at it, isTeaching Public Service
in the Digital Age, an open syllabus for public serviceleaders. Competency 7 (of 8)
is that ‘a digital-era public service leader understands how to use data to inform
decisions, design and run services, and create public value inside and outside
government’, offering to teach public servants to:
●
understand what types of problems that will require data scientists versus
statisticians or economists;
●identify the skills needed to acquire and clean data;
●‘understand how the architecture and governance of new digital systems
will make data more or less easy to use, share and maintain’;
●‘explain how the gap between 'policy data' and 'operations data' is
collapsing’; and
●‘anticipate and mitigate problems related to the sharing of data within governments.’
There is also aseparate competency– to ‘anticipateand mitigate the privacy,
security and ethical risks that are inherent to governing in a digital era’.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government38

Assessing the offer against the ODI framework
On the subject of training materials, James Kuht, one of the creators of the Data
Masterclass, toldan event at the Institute for Governmentin February 2021:
‘there’s a wealth of content, but some of it was difficult to access. Some of it was
great – but other parts of it weren’t the most engaging.’
It is difficult for this report to be definitive, given some resources are behind
government logins and there will be many other offers from individual government
organisations that are not obvious from outside government.
But looking at the offer from the GSCU and some of the functions and professions,
a lot of the hexagons on the left-hand literacy side of the ODI’s Data Skills
Framework relevant to strategic and contextual critical skills would appear to be
covered (as well as awareness of, and some basic skills around, the technical skills
highlighted on the right-hand side). Some hexagons not obviously covered might
include ‘Innovating with data’ and ‘Achieving sustainability’, but the emerging
Government Office for Technology Transferand theData Sustainability Charter
mentioned in the NDS may deal with these in due course. One of the challenges in
mapping the landscape is that some initiatives that are not obviously part of the
central training and curriculum machinery have useful resources – such as the
Government Data Quality Hub, or theperformance analysiscommunity, which
might support ‘measuring success’.
The various courses and resources also appear to span different levels of the
ODI’s framework, with all civil servants being offered basic data literacy training as
part of the government curriculum, and the professions and functions having more
advanced offers. However, there is a risk that some of those things offered by the
professions and functions that could be of wider use might not be more widely
available, and that some of government’s most prominent initiatives – such as the
Data Masterclass – started with senior leaders and may still focus on particular
groups (such as future leaders) rather than all civil servants who could benefit. The
biggest challenge may be understanding exactly what is available across the
whole of government.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government39

Chapter 4: Public sector
data literacy initiatives
for others
The UK government is interested in the data literacy of the wider population and
not just its own workforce. There are fewer of these initiatives and many have a
workforce or economic focus, at the expense of engagement with the place of
data literacy in people’s lives outside the workplace. Also, many of the
government’s major announcements on literacy and skills have tended to be about
more advanced skills. These include training public sector analysts in data science
and using government tech fellowships to attract ‘world-class tech talent’ – both
trumpeted inthe September 2020 press releaseaccompanyingthe NDS – and
initiatives such as providingup to £24 million tofund AI and data science degree
conversion courses.
But there are some exceptions.
The National Data Strategy
TheNDShighlights several challenges for data skillsacross the economy, particularly:
●
‘Lack of coordinated vision and leadership across multiple industry
interests’, requiring a ‘coherent approach across all skills stakeholders and
landscapes’
●‘Greater clarity needed in describing data skills required by industry’
●‘The need for the formal and vocational education system to better
prepare those leaving school, further education and university for
increasingly data-rich lives and careers’
●‘Industries needing to develop their understanding of their own data
skills needs’
●‘A limited pool of data-skilled individuals nationally’.
Although the government recognises that some of these are for industry itself to
address, it also takes responsibility for working with industry and delivering on
some pledges itself. Acknowledging the shifting and uncertain definitions of data
skills, one such promised action is to publish ‘a working definition of data skills in
the wider economy that sets out clear distinctions between data skills, digital skills
and AI skills’ – this has not yet happened (nor has a similar NDS pledge for a
shared definition of data expertise across central government, though this may
change with forthcoming work from CDDO).
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government40

But others have. DCMS actively supports theData SkillsTaskforce. This is
co-chaired by the Alan Turing Institute and Accenture, and consists of members
from industry, academia and National Academies as well as government (and the
ODI), and was established partly in response to Nesta’sAnalytic Britainreport. It is
cited as one of the main national leadership institutions on skills, andwith
government backinghas createda data skills self-assessmentportal or toolthat
allows small and medium sized enterprises ‘to understand [their] organisational
and technical readiness with respect to data’. There is alsoan online course for
leaderswith responsibility for data science functions,supporting them to ‘develop
a foundational understanding of the capabilities, risks and limitations of data and
AI’ in their organisation, ‘explore the ways in which organisations are using data to
create business value’, and ‘reflect on the data maturity’ of their organisation and
think about next steps.
Another major project under the auspices of the NDS is with the OfS, the public
body that works with higher education institutions ‘to make sure that students
succeed in higher education’. DCMS and the OfS are working with seven
universities to testhow ‘foundational’ data skillsare being taught to undergraduates
whose degrees do not include substantial data science elements, an extension of
existing work onpostgraduate conversion coursesforAI and data science. The
evaluations are due to be published in summer 2022.
Beyond the National Data Strategy
One of the pledges in the government’s Online Harms White Paper and its work
around internet safety and online harms (which has led to the Online Safety Bill
currently making its way through parliament) was to develop anOnline Media
Literacy Strategy. This was published by DCMS in July2021. At the heart of the
strategy is a media literacy framework consisting of five key areas, each based on a
principle. One of these is the principle that: ‘Users should understand the risks of
sharing personal data online, how that data can be used by others, and are able to
take action to protect their privacy online’. ItcitesOfcom pollingthat indicates that,
although 73% of users described themselves as ‘very confident’ or ‘fairly confident’
managing their data online, 44% of these ‘confident’ respondents were unaware
that data could be collected through smartphone apps, ‘and 20% were unaware of
the existence of cookies altogether’. Other principles also include elements of what
might be described as data literacy. For example, principle 2 says: ‘Users should
understand how the online environment operates and use this to inform decisions
online’, and includes understanding how data feeds into algorithms and social
media business models within its expectations. The Online Media Literacy Strategy
is unusual in major government literacy initiatives in being aimed at individuals as
citizens or going about their normal (online) lives, rather than being focused on their
role in the workforce.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government41

The DfE also provides a list ofSkills Bootcampsforeligible adults aged 19 and
over, available online and in locations around the country. This includes many
courses under a ‘digital’ heading, such as digital leadership, AI and machine
learning, and several around data and data analysis. They are all aimed at helping
people develop sector-specific skills and be fast-tracked to interviews with local
employers (and therefore focus on targeted skills rather than more general data
literacy). The department is also responsible for piloting some data-centric short
courses under the Lifelong Learning Entitlement as part ofa trial with the OfS.
DfE is also responsible for theEssential DigitalSkills Framework, which ‘defines
the digital skills adults need to safely benefit from, participate in and contribute to
the digital world’ and is designed to support those offering training to adults ‘to
secure their essential digital skills’. It also informs theLloyds Bank Consumer
Digital Index, which conducts a survey of basic digitalskills. Data-related skills in
the framework include understanding ‘that others can capture and use my data
and that I can protect and secure my personal data against such threats through
privacy settings’ and ‘that I must not share other people’s data online without their
consent’, while ‘additional skills for work’ include ‘use appropriate software,
including a spreadsheet, to manipulate and analyse data to help solve problems at
work’. This framework does not appear to be cited in any subsequent government
work on data literacy and has few other mentions on GOV.UK. A 2021 report by
FutureDotNowargues that the framework has not yetachieved cut through, and
estimates 17.1 million adults (52% of the workforce) still lack essential digital skills
for work.
The ICO runs theYour Data Mattersprogramme, whichhas a range of resources
including lesson plans, andOfcom’s Making Sense ofMediais a major
programme to support the development of online skills. The devolved
administrations also have their own programmes: for example in Scotland, the
Data Labhas funded some training and is a partnerinData Skills for Work, a
project that ‘aims to provide all of our citizens, from school pupils to adult learners,
with the opportunity to learn and master the necessary skills to drive and sustain
data driven innovation in the region, regardless of background, gender or location’,
including a basic level of data literacy. It notes ‘we all need to be more data savvy’.
It is striking that, while some major UK government programmes will rely on greater
data literacy, they don’t have much to say about it. For example,the Levelling Up
white paperincludes various pledges on data, includinga new body to ‘empower’
citizens to scrutinise local government through providing better data – but includes
no consideration of the skills citizens will need to do so or the ecosystem required to
support them.Global Britain in a Competitive Age:the Integrated Review of
Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policyuses the UK’s status as a
‘global leader’ in AI as a case study, and talks about strengthening this position
through ‘improving the supply of AI talent and boosting high-level skills’, increasing
investment in research, supporting the ethical adoption of technologies, and
international partnerships, but says nothing specific about equipping the population
with the literacy necessary to support this.
Although beyond the scope of this report, there are many non-government
organisations also thinking about how to boost data literacy. One prominent
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government42

example is theAlliance for Data Science Professionals, encompassing organisations
including the British Computer Society, Royal Statistical Society, The Royal Society,
the Royal Academy of Engineering, The Operational Research Society, Institute of
Mathematics and its Applications, the National Physical Laboratory and The Alan
Turing Institute, which is ‘defining the standards needed to ensure an ethical and
well-governed approach so the public, organisations and governments can have
confidence in how their data is used’.
Assessing the offer against the ODI framework
The external offer seems lacking compared to the internal government offer on
data literacy. Most of the initiatives focus more on data skills, rather than a more
foundational data literacy offer. This means the focus is on the right-hand side of
the ODI Data Skills Framework of technical skills, and the higher levels of the ODI
Levels of Data Literacy, rather than the left-hand literacy skills and lower levels of
data literacy for a wider population.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government43

Next steps
One of the six points in theODI’s manifestofor openand trustworthy data
ecosystems and a world where data works for everyone is data capability:
‘Everyone must have the opportunity to understand how data can be and is
being used. We need data literacy for all, data science skills, and experience
using data to help solve problems’.
We believe it is vital that government recognises the importance of ‘data literacy’
as well as data skills, if it wants to develop a public sector workforce that is
confident and capable in using data to make and implement meaningful policies,
build useful services and make informed decisions; foster a national private
sector workforce that can thrive in a data-driven economy; and support
well-informed citizens in a data-rich society. The size of the public sector
workforce and government’s ability to lead by example means its internal and
external initiatives can have a big impact. The government’s pledges, in the NDS,
Plan for Growth,Integrated Reviewand National AIStrategy, show it is
committed to improving data literacy.
But, as this report shows, the different overlapping ‘literacies’ – such as digital and
media literacy – which lack clear, consistent definitions, mean the government is at
risk of work being fragmented, duplicated and unaligned, although ‘data literacy’ is
foundational to many of them. Some of these literacies, such as ‘digital literacy’,
tend to focus more on the technical and practical skills on the right-hand side of
the ODI Data Skills Framework, rather than the more critical, contextual and
strategic ‘literacy’ topics on the left-hand side.
There is no consistent definition of ‘data literacy’ across government, which
reflects debates in academia and elsewhere. There is some recognition that
‘literacy’ means more than just technical, analytical and engineering skills, and that
everyone – not just data specialists – needs some degree of data literacy. The AI
Roadmap, from the independent, advisory AI Council, has a particularly
interesting, holistic view of literacy for all sitting alongside specialists skills for
some and greater diversity in data-focused professions.
Government’s internal offering of courses and resources on data literacy –
especially those brought together by the GSCU and the Analysis Function –
covers a lot of the more strategic and contextual skills on the left-hand side of the
ODI Data Skills Framework, and engages the different levels of the ODI Levels of
Data Literacy. But there is a risk that some things offered by specific professions,
and to particular levels of officials, could be of wider use. The internal offering is
more extensive than many of government’s external initiatives, which focus on
more technical skills.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government44

Overall, for all the apparently good work going on in government, there remains
greater focus on the technical skills of the right-hand side of the ODI Data Skills
Framework than the more contextual literacy of the left-hand side. This also means
that there can sometimes be a focus on the higher levels of the ODI Levels of Data
Literacy, rather than data literacy for all, as per the ODI’s definition of data
capability.
Several issues remain that need to be tackled.
The first is the lack of definitions around ‘data literacy’ and the other, overlapping
types of ‘literacy’. Something like the ODI Data Skills Framework (with its
hexagons of different topics) and the ODI Levels of Data Literacy (with its different
levels) could help give some shape to this – helping to disentangle some of the
specific areas, spheres or skills involved – as could the NDS commitment to
publish a definition. Some guide to how the various other overlapping literacies
relate to foundational data literacy and how the government thinks they all
intersect would also be helpful. This might also help develop more focus on the
importance of data literacy for individuals as citizens, rather than just as workers:
most current initiatives tend to revolve around the workforce (the ‘data-driven
economy’, as the NDS puts it) rather than society (the ‘data-rich lives’ that the
NDS also considers important).
This could help with the second issue – the risk of fragmentation, duplication and
lack of awareness of different work across government. The GSCU has done an
excellent job of trying to pull together different resources from across different
professions and functions – but inevitably, there will be individual departments and
other public sector organisations developing resources which could be of wider
use. Making all the resources even easier to find and access – perhaps grouped
under a ‘data literacy’ heading – will make them easier for people to use and
integrate into their own training plans.
The disconnection is particularly acute when it comes to the government’s
public-facing data literacy work. The resources and training offered inside
government feels more extensive than many of the current external initiatives. It may
also be that some internal resources and training materials are only available to
certain professions, and not more widely. There may be understandable reasons for
this – it costs money to develop resources like the Data Masterclasses, there may
be licensing issues, and partial offerings (for example, videos and quizzes but not
the experience of shared learning with a wider cohort) may not be as good as the
full offer. But increased openness about the materials available, within government
and to the wider population, could be of real benefit and support government’s
ambitions for data literacy for the wider population and workforce.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government45

Annex
Public sector data literacy initiatives
for government
●
Government Curriculum and Campus from theGSCU: seeBetter Training,
Knowledge and Networks: the New Curriculum and Campus for
Government Skills
●TheAnalysis Function, including itslearning curriculum,functional
standard, andAnalysis in Government Month
●TheGovernment Statistical Service, and itscoursesand resources
●TheDigital, data and technologyprofession, withlinks tovarious GDS
Academy courses
●The Government Knowledge and Information Management Profession,
andits document on continuing professional development
●Government Economics Service
●Government Social Research Service
●Policy profession, and itscompetency frameworkandtraining prospectus
●ONS Data Science Campus (previously GSCU and 10DS),Data
Masterclasses for Senior Leaders(more inthis presentation,this blogpost
andthis blogpost)
●NHS England and Improvement, ‘Making Data Count’ initiative
●TheGovernment Data Quality Hub, including adataquality framework,
training course on the basics ofdata quality, amaturityframework, and
(with Data Standards Authority)DataConnect21
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government46

Public sector data literacy initiatives for others
●
Provision by the government-backedData Skills Taskforce,including adata
skills self-assessment portalor tool and anonlinecourse for leaders
●A DCMS and OfS pilot testinghow ‘foundational’ dataskills are being
taught to undergraduates(an extension of work onpostgraduate
conversion coursesfor AI and data science)
●DCMS,Online Media Literacy Strategy
●Department for Education,Skills Bootcamps
●DfE and Office for Students,piloting data-centricshort courses under the
Lifelong Learning Entitlement
●DfE,Essential Digital Skills Framework
●ICO,Your Data Matters
●Ofcom,Making Sense of Media
●TheData Lab(Scotland),Data Skills for Work
Stakeholder engagement
We are very grateful to those who participated in stakeholder interviews and/or
reviewed drafts of this work, including representatives of:
●
Analysis Function
●Central Digital and Data Office
●Civil Service Modernisation and Reform team
●Data Skills Taskforce
●Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
●Government Skills and Curriculum Unit
●NHS Transformation Directorate
●Office for National Statistics Data Science Campus
●Office for AI
We are also grateful to those who provided other suggestions and links to
previous relevant work.
Open Data Institute | April 2022 | Data literacy and the UK government47