

 

  
  
 
Contents 
Contents1 
About2 
Introduction3 
How do we define decentralised publishing initiatives?4 
Examples of decentralised publishing initiatives4 
Examples of initiatives that do not share these characteristics5 
Where is this pattern applicable?6 
How are decentralised initiatives building data infrastructure?7 
How do some existing initiatives compare?8 
Early observations8 
Addressing gaps in data infrastructure8 
Validation and ranking8 
Provision of aggregated datasets8 
Data hosting services9 
Skew towards open data9 
Next Steps9 
Methodology10 
Limitations10 
  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   1 

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
first published as a draft in October 2020. Its lead author is Leigh Dodds, with 
contributions from Josh D’Addario, Jack Hardinges, Elea Himmelsbach, James 
Maddison, Emily Sinclair and Jeni Tennison. 
 
We would like to thank those who have supported our research and provided 
initial feedback on the report and the comparison of initiatives, including 
representatives from OpenActive, Open Contracting, OpenOwnership and 
360Giving. 
 
If you want to share feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact the 
“Data Infrastructure for Common Challenges” project team at 
research@theodi.org.  
 
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click 
the ‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   2 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 

  
  
Introduction 
Improving healthcare, switching to renewable energy and responding to crises 
and disasters are all difficult problems that need to be solved through 
collaborative approaches. No single organisation has the resources or skills to 
solve the problems. Or the understanding of how to create solutions that work for 
everyone. 
 
Multi-stakeholder initiatives are increasingly being set up to do things like advance 
research or tackle sustainability goals. For example, the UK’s Industrial Strategy is 
geared around four ‘Grand Challenges’, underpinned by missions that will be 
1
tackled through cross-sector collaborations. Businesses are working together to 
create more resilient supply chains. Local communities are using 3D printers and 
openly licensed designs to manufacture personal protective equipment to fight the 
Covid-19 pandemic. 
 
Data can help us to understand and address these challenges. It can help to 
improve decision making, drive innovation and measure progress. Accessing, 
using and sharing data are frequent activities within many of these new initiatives. 
 
However, our data infrastructure is often poorly designed or managed. This limits 
our ability to maximise value from data and opens the door to harmful impacts 
from its use. Programmes to strengthen and build data infrastructure have 
become a necessary activity in several of these wider collaborations. 
 
We refer to these programmes as ‘data access initiatives’. We describe them as 
programmes which: 
 
●have a clear challenge, in the form of a specific social, environmental or 
economic problem that is the focus for the collaboration 
●involve multiple stakeholders actively working together to solve the 
problem 
●include a strong focus on collecting, using and sharing data as part of 
their work.  
 
Over the last few years the ODI has been exploring a range of data access 
models, including data institutions, data trusts, data observatories and data 
collaborations. This paper is part of a project exploring how data access 
2
initiatives are building data infrastructure to support their work. 
3
 
We have identified one common design pattern for increasing access to data 
through the adoption of open standards for data. For the purposes of this report 
we are calling these ‘decentralised data publishing initiatives’.  
 
This report provides a short summary of this design pattern and compares how it 
is being applied across 14 different initiatives. Our intention is to share insights 
1
 BEIS (2019) ‘​The Grand Challenges’​,  
2
 ODI (2019) ‘​Mapping the wide world of data sharing​’,  
3
 ODI (2020_ ‘​Data infrastructure for common challenges​’  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   3 

  
  
into when and where it may be appropriate to use this approach to increasing 
access to data, how to make it successful, and the types of initiatives that might 
benefit from it. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   4 

  
  
What is a decentralised 
publishing initiative? 
Data access initiatives are programmes that: 
  
●involve multiple stakeholders, collaborating to address a common 
challenge  
●are increasing access to or use of data​.  
 
To define ‘decentralised publishing initiatives’ we have chosen to build on this 
definition by adding additional elements. 
 
A ‘decentralised data publishing initiative’ is a data access initiative in which: 
 
●data is published in a decentralised way​: the data providers make the 
data available via their own infrastructure 
●the ​data providers are publishing data about the same kinds of things, 
for example spending data. 
●the data is​ shared ​or​ open data 
●a ​single, common standard is used by all organisations​ such that the 
data is published in the same kind of way 
●the ​initiative provides guidance, tools and technology​ to support data 
publication and use, for example a central register of datasets to support 
discovery 
Examples of decentralised publishing initiatives 
From our initial research we have identified several initiatives that display these 
characteristics. The examples include: 
 
1.OpenActive​ – UK activity providers such as gyms publish live data feeds 
for opportunities to be physically active, such as spin classes, under an 
open licence, using a common data model and application programming 
interface (API) standard 
2.Open Contracting​ – governments around the world publish openly 
licensed datasets describing public procurement tenders and contracts 
3.Open Banking​ – major banks in the UK publish open data about banking 
products as well as shared data about bank transactions using a common 
data model and set of API standards 
4.LIVES​ – municipalities in New York and San Francisco  publish data about 
restaurant inspections 
5.UK Bus Open Data Service​ – bus operators in the UK  publish data feeds 
about bus timetables 
 
For more examples and a comparison, see the section: ‘​How do some existing 
initiatives compare?​’ 
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   5 

  
  
Examples of initiatives that do not share these 
characteristics 
In reviewing a wide range of data access initiatives we identified many that share 
some of the characteristics of a decentralised data publishing initiative, but vary 
from the core pattern in different ways. 
 
First, in some initiatives, while the data may conform to a common standard, it is 
being published or shared via a single central portal, repository or platform.  
 
For example the Europeana project, which helps cultural heritage organisations 
share data about their collections, asks those organisations to submit data using a 
common standard. The data is then made available via Europeana.  
4
 
This shift from a decentralised to a centralised approach to publication and use 
creates a very different data ecosystem. It may happen by design or through one 
aggregator or intermediary coming to dominate the ecosystem. Or it may arise 
because publishers lack capability: a centralised infrastructure is being used to 
overcome issues with them providing their own data infrastructure to consistently 
and reliably share open data in a trusted way. 
 
Second, common standards might be in wide use across a sector, industry and 
community, but are being used to publish data covering a diverse range of 
different subjects. This is often the case when the underlying standards define 
general purpose data exchange formats or API designs, rather than common 
schemas or data models.  
 
For example, the ​OpenGeospatial Consortium​ works with a variety of stakeholders 
to create and support adoption of geospatial data standards. However the 
organisations adopting those standards are publishing a very wide range of 
different types of geospatial data, for a variety of different purposes.  
 
Not all programmes to develop and support adoption of an open standard are 
data access initiatives or decentralised data publishing initiatives. 
 
Third, there are many examples of organisations publishing similar datasets, 
where there is no common standard being used to publish that data.  
 
In these cases there may not be a data access initiative that is coordinating this 
activity. Publishers do not see themselves as participating in a common initiative 
with a shared goal or vision. This may point to a need for a new initiative.  
 
For example, many retailers provide information about their store locations or 
products, but there is no common standard or approach for making that data 
available even though it is relatively consistent across different websites. 
 
In other cases there may be a shared initiative, but it is not working to build or 
strengthen the data infrastructure necessary to increase quality, consistency and 
support use of the data. This might highlight a need for the initiative to broaden its 
activities.  
4
 Europeana (n.d.), ‘​Process​’,  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   6 

  
  
 
For example, the CovidSecureCheck project is building a register of Covid-19 risk 
5
assessments to gather evidence and support analyses of approaches being taken. 
However it doesn’t recommend that organisations use a specific standard format 
or approach for publishing those assessments. 
 
Like any attempt to apply a new definition to the real world there are many 
examples that are more or less closely aligned with our definition of decentralised 
data publishing initiatives.  
 
Our goal in this paper is to outline the general pattern so we can compare how it is 
being used and implemented in practice. The specific design decisions behind 
individual initiatives are often more instructive to consider than refining a formal 
classification. 
 
Discussing edge cases and the different priorities and choices that underlie them 
is a useful way to explore how the design of data infrastructure reflects the 
ecosystem in which it exists, and the purposes for which it is being created. 
 
 
  
5
 TUC (2020) ‘​CovidSecureCheck​’,  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   7 

  
  
Where is this pattern 
applicable? 
Building a data infrastructure around decentralised publishing of data seems to be 
applicable when one of more of the following preconditions apply: 
 
●the ​data is naturally distributed​, for example it is being collected and 
managed by a large number of different organisations 
●there are ​multiple similar organisations with a shared purpose​, such as 
a public task or similar business model, which are collecting or producing 
the same type of data  
●there is ​utility in using both original data sources and aggregated 
data​. In some cases consumers may benefit both from directly accessing 
data from a single provider, with extra insights or use cases being 
supported by use of aggregate data across multiple publishers 
 
A decentralised approach may have a range of benefits, including: 
 
●removing central costs for data collection and management​, which 
will be higher where there are a large number of publishers who may need 
to contribute, or where the volume of data to be collected is significant 
●increasing timeliness of access to data​, for example if the data is 
regularly updated or published and creating an intermediary would slow 
down the publishing of that data 
●making data available from source, rather than indirectly via an 
intermediary may ​reduce risks​, ​increase trust​ or ​clarify the provenance 
of data​. 
 
Our other research projects on sustainable data access and building trust 
67
explore these topics in more detail. 
 
  
6
 ODI (2020) ‘​R&D Sustainable Data Access​’,  
7
 ODI (2020) ‘​R&D Building trust through certification and audit​”’,  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   8 

  
  
How are decentralised 
initiatives building data 
infrastructure? 
Data infrastructure consists of: 
8
 
●data assets, such as datasets, identifiers, and registers 
●standards and technologies used to curate and provide access to data 
assets 
●guidance and policies that inform the use and management of data assets 
and the data infrastructure itself 
●organisations that govern the data infrastructure 
●the communities involved in contributing to or maintaining it, and those 
who are impacted by decisions that are made using it. 
 
There are many different activities that support the development, maintenance 
and use of data infrastructure. For decentralised data publishing initiatives, these 
activities include: 
 
Standards 
●Scoping, development, publication and ongoing governance of an open 
standard for data, used by all those publishing data covered by the 
initiative. 
●Providing feedback to publishers and data users about whether published 
datasets conform to the standard. This might take the form of individual 
validation reports or conformance indicators in a registry. 
 
Data assets 
●Maintaining a registry of published data. This might be a list of 
organisations publishing data, or links to individual datasets. The registry 
might be maintained by the initiative or contributors. 
●Harvesting and collecting published datasets and making them available 
as a single aggregated dataset either for download or use via APIs, in 
addition to them being available directly from source. 
 
Technology 
●Developing and releasing tools that can be used by data publishers to 
support them in publishing data that conforms to the standard. Might 
include spreadsheet templates, API frameworks, anonymisation tools, or 
other technology. 
●Developing and releasing tools that can be used to validate data against 
the open standard, to check conformance with the specification. 
 
8
 Open Data for Development (2019) ‘​Data infrastructure​’  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   9 

  
  
Guidance and policies 
●Publishing guidance for data publishers about how to publish necessary 
data. Might include technical guidance on standards, as well as 
non-technical information. 
●Providing support for policymakers, regulators and others in developing 
legislation, procurement guidance, regulation or other policies that 
enforce, inform or support the publication of data according to the 
standard. 
 
Communities 
●Carrying out user research and engagement to understand the needs of 
data publishers, users and other stakeholders. Might involve formal user 
research methods, interviews or informal collection of needs. 
●Providing a help desk or similar support function to allow data publishers 
and users to request help and guidance on publishing or using data. 
A comparison of existing initiatives 
Using the activities identified through our analysis (see ​Methodology​), we have 
compared 14 different initiatives. They vary based on the following: 
 
●The ​licensing​ of data. We have seen examples of both data sharing and 
open publication of data. 
●Their ​geographic scope​. We have seen examples of regional, national 
and international initiatives 
●Whether data sharing and publication of data is ​mandatory or voluntary. 
●The ​sector or domain​ in which the initiative is focused – we have seen 
examples in transport, health, finance, public policy and physical activity. 
●The ​type of challenge being tackled​. Some initiatives focus on tackling 
transparency, others aim to drive innovation in a sector 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   10 
Comparing decentralised data publishing initiatives 
 
View the result of our comparison here.  
 
The spreadsheet includes: 
 
●a brief summary of each initiative 
●a list of activities associated with creating or maintaining data 
infrastructure 
●an indication of whether the individual initiative is carrying out those 
activities. 

  
  
How do the initiatives compare? 
The comparison identifies a number of similarities and differences between 
initiatives which are helpful to highlight. 
Addressing gaps in data infrastructure 
By definition all of these initiatives involve driving adoption of a standard. However 
in the majority of cases these initiatives are scoping, developing and governing 
new standards, rather than driving adoption of existing standards.  
 
This suggests that these initiatives are typically addressing a gap in existing data 
infrastructure. 
Validation and ranking 
While the majority of initiatives appear to provide feedback to publishers on the 
quality of published data, the actual approaches vary. Some initiatives provide 
direct, private feedback to publishers while others produce public reports to 
assess conformance. 
 
Some initiatives or their communities go a step further and produce an index or 
ranking of publishers based on the published data. This seems to be more 
common around initiatives whose purpose is related to transparency and 
compliance. 
Provision of aggregated datasets 
While all of the initiatives are maintaining a public registry of datasets to support 
discovery of the underlying data, only half of the initiatives are producing an 
aggregated dataset and/or an API. 
 
For some initiatives an aggregated dataset would may not be possible because 
the underlying data is shared and not open data. 
 
The lack of an aggregated dataset in other circumstances may be due to a range 
of factors: 
 
●There is more utility in accessing the source data, rather than analysing 
data in bulk. 
●The number of source datasets may be small enough that investing in an 
aggregation is not useful – data consumers can easily access what they 
need. 
●Participation in the initiative remains low, or it is still at an early stage and 
developing an aggregation is part of a future roadmap. 
●Data consumers have a variety of different needs so a ‘one size fits all’ 
aggregation may be difficult to create. 
●The initiative does not have the technical or financial resources to 
maintain the aggregate dataset. 
 
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   11 

  
  
Few initiatives are providing tools and technology to support data consumers in 
aggregating or harvesting data. For those initiatives that are not providing an 
aggregate dataset, providing additional tools for data consumers may be a gap to 
be addressed. 
 
Data hosting services 
A small number of initiatives offer a data hosting service to provide an alternative 
to publishers publishing data themselves. For example the UK Bus Open Data 
service offers to host data for bus operators who have fewer than 40 routes. 
 
This is likely to be a pragmatic approach aimed at increasing participation where 
some publishers may not have the resources to publish data directly. As noted 
previously, if all publishers use this infrastructure, it is no longer a ​decentralised 
data publishing initiative. 
Skew towards open data 
While some of the initiatives we reviewed are using the decentralised data 
publishing approach to support sharing of data, there is a clear skew towards 
open publication of data. 
 
The decentralised data publishing approach is likely to be simpler to implement 
where data can be published openly.  
 
Much of the groundwork of developing standards, technology and guidance is 
similar across initiatives regardless of licensing. But where data is shared with 
restrictions there is additional work required to define, for example, common 
approaches to data governance and shared API standards that support secure 
access to data within the terms of the restricted licence. 
  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   12 

  
  
Next steps 
This report summarises our current understanding of how decentralised data 
publishing initiatives are creating data infrastructure to tackle a range of 
challenges. We invite feedback to help broaden the range of initiatives being 
compared and to help develop further insights into the benefits and challenges of 
applying this approach. 
 
As part of this research project we will be developing and recommending tools 
and guidance that may help those who are leading or planning initiatives in 
improving their approach to creating and maintaining data infrastructure.  
 
If you would like to be involved in this project, then please contact the ‘Data 
Infrastructure for Common Challenges’ project team at ​research@theodi.org​. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   13 

  
  
Methodology 
To develop this comparison we went through the following process: 
 
1.We created a ‘long list’ of data access initiatives, drawing on those we 
have worked with, supported and led. This was supplemented with new 
initiatives identified through wider desk research. 
2.Drawing on interviews and desk research we developed logic models for 
9
a small number of initiatives. This helped us clarify the activities of those 
initiatives. 
3.We classified the activities to identify those that were related to the 
development, maintenance or adoption of data infrastructure. 
4.Having identified that a subset of initiatives shared some common 
characteristics, we created a definition of the ‘decentralised publishing 
initiatives​’​ pattern and a list of related activities. 
5.Using this definition and list, we compared a range of decentralised 
publishing, drawing from our original long list with additions that were 
crowd-sourced from social media. 
6.We requested feedback from some stakeholders directly involved in the 
relevant initiatives to help improve the accuracy of our comparison. Any 
remaining gaps or misunderstandings are our own. 
 
It is important to note that our focus has been on data infrastructure. Successful 
initiatives will be creating or adopting other types of (digital) infrastructure – for 
example, collaboration or video conferencing tools, or other software and services 
that are helpful in tackling their challenge. Exploring those aspects are out of 
scope for our project. 
 
Data access initiatives will also be involved in a broader range of activities that 
help to manage, sustain and grow the initiative, but which are not directly related 
to building or maintaining data infrastructure. Examples include fundraising, 
recruitment, communications, etc. Documenting these activities is also out of 
scope for our project but they are obviously important in delivering impactful 
programmes. 
 
We have not assessed all of the details of how the compared initiatives are 
carrying out the work of creating data infrastructure. Each initiative may be 
approaching these activities in different ways and with different levels of 
investment. Our goal is to highlight similarities and differences to prompt 
discussion and review. 
Where there are other gaps, we invite feedback to help us improve our analysis. 
  
9
 PHE (2018) ‘​Introduction to logic models​’ 
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   14 

  
  
Limitations 
We are aware that there are several limitations in our survey and initial 
comparison. 
 
●The set of initiatives that we identified and shortlisted for review are 
biased towards those known to us through our network and broader 
engagement. We invite suggestions on further initiatives to include: we 
would particularly like to identify further initiatives from the Global South, 
as well as a broader range of domains. 
●The initiatives we have reviewed are still active and have a public 
presence. There may be local initiatives that we have not identified. There 
may also be ‘survivor bias’ in the analysis, as those we can easily review 
are still active and successful enough to be easily identified 
●The activities we have identified are those that we have been able to find 
through desk and user research, as well as some direct feedback from 
those involved in the initiatives. There may be other activities that we have 
overlooked or which should be more prominent in our analysis. 
●Like all other programmes of work, data access initiatives may cause 
harm or fail to promote diversity, equity and justice. The activities and 
outputs they create may not always demonstrate good practice around 
ethics, equity or inclusion. The activities identified in our comparison are a 
starting point for discussion and improvement, rather than a definitive list 
of good practice. We invite feedback on the identified activities and 
suggestions on how to conduct them in ways that minimise harm and 
tackle inequities. 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute | December 2020 | Research reportComparing decentralised data publishing initiatives   15 