

 

 
 
Contents 
Contents1 
About2 
Executive summary3 
Introduction5 
Landscape review5 
Key findings at this stage6 
A number of symptom trackers in the ecosystem6 
Ecosystem structure6 
Lack of collaboration6 
Lack of transparency around data collection6 
Open data availability6 
User base7 
Specific types of users7 
Location7 
Data discovery8 
Types of data8 
Observations about types of data9 
Commonly asked questions9 
Data standards9 
Representation of communities10 
Changes over time10 
Mental health and wellbeing11 
Outputs11 
Individual guidance11 
Research insights11 
Improvements to existing services11 
How does the data collected relate to the outputs?12 
The symptom tracking data ecosystem13 
The UK symptom tracking data ecosystem13 
Where is value being created in this example?14 
Barriers to impact14 
Opportunities15 
International variations15 
A single source approach15 
A more collaborative approach16 
Where is value being created in this example17  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   1 

 
 
Discussion18 
Data discovery18 
Legal complexities18 
Technical barriers20 
Trust and trustworthiness20 
 
Recommendations20 
Standards for data21 
Enabling hub to facilitate interactions21 
Building trust with the public through ethical approaches22 
Appendices23 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
published in January 2021. Its lead author was James Maddison with 
contributions from Olivier Thereaux and Jeni Tennison. If you want to share 
feedback by email or would like to get in touch, contact the Open Covid-19 
project team at ​research@theodi.org​. 
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   2 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 

 
 
Executive summary 
In April 2020, the Open Data Institute (ODI) ​launched a new project​, funded by 
Luminate, which aims to support the building of an open and trustworthy data 
ecosystem for Covid-19. As part of this project, our team looked at the ecosystem 
of symptom trackers to understand how they operate and cooperate, and what 
data flows they enabled. 
 
Covid-19 symptom trackers may be expected to collect similar data and have a 
comparable purpose, but our team observed a diverse ecosystem of 
organisations, working towards a variety of outcomes.  
 
We did find instances of organic collaboration between symptom trackers, but 
coordination seemed to be rare. It was generally limited to government 
intervention – either by mandating a single tracker, or by empowering an 
organisation with an intermediary role to manage the aggregation and processing 
of data 
 
While this disaggregated, decentralised approach was generally more agile, and 
allowed the emergence of symptom-tracking applications at a time of crisis and 
emergency, there would have been value in interventions aimed at increasing 
standardisation, interoperability, and knowledge sharing.  
 
This document is not a comprehensive review of the symptom-tracking data 
ecosystem. It provides an overview of our research in this area and outlines some 
high-level recommendations for symptom trackers, health policy organisations 
and funders. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   3 

 
 
Introduction 
During the early stages of this project, the ODI ​offered free support​ to people and 
organisations who have data they think could help the world to navigate the 
pandemic. One organisation which requested support was the team behind 
TrackTogether, an application which allows users to monitor and record 
symptoms of illness.  
 
These types of applications – known as ​symptom trackers​ – can help individuals 
to decide whether they have symptoms of Covid-19, and therefore need to seek 
further medical advice or support. If enough users engage with a particular 
symptom tracker, the data that is being collected could be used by researchers 
for a number of purposes, for example to identify where Covid-19 outbreaks are 
likely to occur next. These types of insights could be used by decision makers 
across sectors to make more informed decisions about how, when and where to 
respond to the pandemic. Symptom trackers are not a new phenomenon, but 
have become an integral part of how we learn about the spread of Covid-19 and 
its symptoms.  
 
The ODI helped ​TrackTogether​ to publish open data from their symptom tracker, 
which involved using: 
  
●the ODI’s ​'Anonymising data in times of crisis' guide​ to reduce the risks of 
reidentification of individuals through the data and  
●the ​Octopub​ open data publishing tool to make the data available on 
Github. Aggregate TrackTogether data is ​now available​ for anyone to 
access, use and share.  
 
The work with TrackTogether highlighted a number of interesting questions:  
 
●How many other symptom trackers have been created to help navigate 
the pandemic?  
●Are these applications collecting similar data from users, and what is this 
data being used for?  
●Are the organisations behind these applications working together to help 
address the wider social and economic challenges presented by 
Covid-19?  
 
With these questions in mind, the ODI decided to ​make exploring the 
symptom-tracking data ecosystem a key area of focus​ for the Covid-19 project. 
The research was broken down into three phases:  
 
1.Landscape review of existing symptom trackers 
2.Data discovery 
3.Data ecosystem mapping  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   4 

 
 
Landscape review 
Landscape reviews provide a broad description and analysis of policy areas, 
largely based on publicly available information. 
 
In phase one of our research, we conducted a landscape review of the Covid-19 
symptom trackers that are currently in operation. Initially, we found 38 
applications that are collecting and using data about user’s symptoms. We used 
targeted web search terms such as ‘Covid-19 symptom-tracking’ or ‘Covid-19 
symptom trackers’, as well as questions such as ‘have I got Covid-19?’. Our 
colleagues at TrackTogether helped by sharing a list of organisations that they 
were aware of who collect Covid-19 symptom data.  
 
To understand whether these applications met with the team’s definition of a 
symptom tracker – an application that helps you monitor and track the symptoms 
of Covid-19 – each initiative was described in terms of the following attributes:  
 
●Initiative name 
●Lead organisation  
●Lead organisation type​ We defined four broad types of organisation: 
private; public; third [sector] and research. It felt important to note this so 
that we could examine an organisation’s motives later, following data 
discovery.  
●Connected organisations​ Information about other organisations involved 
in an initiative. This could include technical partners, users of the data, 
those with an interest in the outputs being created, and funders. This 
helps understand how organisations are sharing data and whether there 
are any common denominators across different initiatives. 
●Country​: This helped us track where the user base for each application 
was, which is useful for understanding the ecosystem that surrounds 
different initiatives.  
●What data is being collected?​ This attribute captured any public 
information about data being collected by the application. This helped us 
identify where to start the data discovery process.  
●Is data being shared with others?​ Any publicly available information 
about data being shared as part of an initiative. It felt important to try to 
understand if applications were communicating to users about data 
sharing, as well as discovering whether any initiatives were sharing with 
each other. 
●Outputs​ Any information about publicly-accessible outputs relating to 
Covid-19 that have been created by the organisations involved in a 
particular initiative. 
●Website​ URL 
 
The full dataset of symptom-tracking applications that we identified is available in 
a ​spreadsheet​.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   5 

 
 
Key findings at this stage 
A number of symptom trackers in the ecosystem 
This research does not capture a complete list of all symptom trackers in 
operation around the world, but it does highlight that there are a large number of 
symptom trackers for users to choose from, particularly in the UK and the US.  
Ecosystem structure 
In most countries, including the UK, it does not appear that there is just one 
accredited symptom tracker which has been endorsed by government or national 
healthcare systems. There are some exceptions to the rule: in Canada and 
Vietnam, governments seem to favour a more centralised approach and publicly 
endorse one symptom-tracking application.  
Lack of collaboration  
We found only two large scale initiatives – ​Project Oasis​ and the ​Coronavirus 
Census Collective​ – that had the same organisations formally involved (beyond the 
NHS as a user of the insights being created). This suggests a lack of collaboration 
between symptom trackers. 
 
There are contexts in which a very diverse and independent ecosystem is ideal, 
but we expected to see more collaboration in the Covid-19 ecosystem, given the 
need to respond to the pandemic quickly and efficiently. In this context, having 
numerous data stewards who do not collaborate may lead to fragmentation, 
leading to bad decisions that affect people’s health and wellbeing. 
Lack of transparency around data collection 
From the outset, we did not find any public information about the types of data 
that different initiatives were collecting. The large majority of initiatives have 
published little or no information about the datasets that they are collecting. While 
this might come as a result of the need to deliver something quickly and 
efficiently, transparency of activities around public health data is important for 
public trust, and should not be forgotten or deprioritised. 
Open data availability 
Beyond TrackTogether’s open data, we found only two initiatives publishing open 
symptom-tracking data. They were ​symptomtracker.org.uk​, a now defunct 
volunteer-led symptom tracker, and ​Studybugs​, an application for parents to 
notify schools when their child has Covid-19 symptoms.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   6 

 
 
User base 
16 of the symptom trackers can be accessed using a web browser and 12 
symptom trackers are available as a downloadable application on a smartphone. 
10 of the symptom trackers have been integrated into existing health and 
wellbeing applications, which consumers use to track personal information on 
subjects such as fitness, diet and even medical records. According to ​a study 
published in 2019, around 33% of the global population over the age of 15 use 
health tracking applications or devices, a large majority of which are between the 
ages of 20 and 39. It is therefore  reasonable to surmise that the majority of 
symptom trackers are targeted at people within a similar age range, that have 
access to smartphones or a computer. 
Specific types of users 
Most of the symptom-tracking applications are marketed for a broad audience, 
but some have been created for very specific audiences. Studybugs, for example, 
is designed for use by parents of school aged children.  
Location 
The majority of applications examined are marketed as tools that can be used by 
citizens within a given geography, for example people in the UK. Some 
applications require proof of residency before you can use them. Two of the 
initiatives – one in Ghana and one in the US – require you to submit a 
country-specific phone number. Failure to do so means a user cannot use the 
application. Three of the initiatives examined have publicly stated that they are 
operating on a global scale, so users from multiple countries are welcome to use 
the application. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   7 

 
 
Data discovery  
In order to identify the types of data that users are being asked to share with 
symptom-tracking applications, we accessed each application and filled in the 
questionnaires provided. At this stage, the team was very careful to not submit 
any false information to the questionnaires, so this research might not reflect all 
the questions asked by some applications if they operate using a question tree 
whereby questions are revealed based on answers to previous questions.  
 
It is also worth noting that at this stage, 14 of the initiatives were ruled out for data 
discovery (see appendix). Two of these initiatives were re-using symptom-tracking 
data from other sources to produce insights on topics such as mobility during the 
pandemic, but were not directly tracking user’s symptoms, and for a number of 
the non-UK applications, the team were unable to access the questionnaires due 
to a requirement to provide proof of residency, such as a phone number or 
postcode. However, we did not rule out these initiatives for the data ecosystem 
mapping exercise below, as some of them are integral to the ecosystem. 
Types of data 
Based on the 24 symptom trackers that we accessed, symptom-tracking data falls 
into 11 broad categories: 
 
●Personal and demographic 
●Employment 
●Household 
●Location 
●Pre-existing health 
●Symptoms of illness 
●Covid-19 infection status 
●Travel 
●Interaction with others 
●Changes in lockdown 
●Mental health and mood 
 
The full list of questions is available in an aggregated list in the appendices of this 
report. There is also a breakdown of how many initiatives asked each question. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   8 

 
 
Observations about types of data 
Commonly asked questions 
The five most commonly-asked questions require the following information: 
 
●The user’s symptoms that correlate with symptoms officially associated 
with Covid-19 (16/28) 
●The age of the user (16/28) 
●Exposure to someone who has been diagnosed with Covid-19 (13/28) 
●The user’s postcode (12/28) 
●The user’s pre-existing health conditions, such as heart disease, diabetes, 
asthma, etc (12/28) 
Data standards 
Many of the applications are collecting the same types of data, but there is a lot of 
variation in how different applications ask users to provide information. The most 
prominent example of this in our research is the way that symptom trackers are 
documenting the age of users. A user’s age is one of the most commonly asked 
questions, but some trackers ask for a full date of birth, others ask for a specific 
age and many ask which age category the user falls into. This suggests that there 
are few commonly adopted data standards – documented agreements about how 
to represent data, which enable us to take a consistent, rule-based approach to 
data management – for Covid-19 symptom data.  
 
In order to understand data, to share it with others and to help them understand it 
too, the data needs to conform to a widely recognised format. Health 
organisations like the National Health Service (NHS) recognise the importance of 
data standards, and are ​working towards​ making sure that information about 
health is captured and categorised using common standards. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   9 

 
 
Representation of communities  
Given that Covid-19 affects different groups and communities in different ways, it 
is important to make sure that the data being collected is representative of all of 
the communities in the area that the application is serving. Gathering data from 
members of groups that have been highlighted as being at a higher risk of fatality 
from Covid-19 is particularly important as an early warning signal.  
 
Early examinations of Covid-19 cases and deaths in multiple countries have found 
that men are ​more at risk of severe illness and death​ than women, so it’s useful 
that eight of the symptom trackers examined are collecting data about an 
individual’s assigned sex. However, four of the symptom trackers also ask users 
to disclose their gender, and one asks for users to disclose their gender without 
asking questions about assigned sex. It is not clear whether questions about 
gender are being asked to address a specific research question, or because 
gender and sex have been amalgamated into one attribute.  
 
One very evident omission by many symptom trackers is questions around race 
and ethnicity. Only four of the identified trackers asked at least one question about 
ethnicity and only one asked multiple questions. Research shows that Covid-19 
can have a different impact on people from different communities. For example, 
early research into ethnicity and Covid-19​ suggests that in the UK, the 
Bangladeshi population has been disproportionately affected by Covid-19, with 
death rates nearly twice as high as the White British population. 
 
Given this evidence that the effects of Covid-19 vary for people from different 
communities, more symptom trackers should consider asking questions about 
protected characteristics​, as well as socioeconomic status so that the valuable 
insights created by symptom trackers do not exclude people from different 
communities. For more information about why it is important to collect information 
about protected characteristics for services that benefit the public, see our report 
‘​Monitoring Equality in Digital Public Services​’. 
Changes over time 
10 of the symptom trackers that we looked at ask questions about how lockdown 
(as opposed to Covid-19 itself) has affected the user, and whether they have seen 
noticeable changes over time. This includes areas such as diet, weight, physical 
activity and sleep.  
 
Five of the initiatives asking these questions are private-sector-led, which might 
suggest that symptom trackers are also being used as an opportunity for 
companies to collect data to help inform their product or service offerings in 
future. The trackers in question offer no clear picture of how this data will be used, 
and who it will benefit. Given that many symptom trackers are collecting data by 
leveraging public goodwill, they should strive to be as transparent as possible 
about what this data is being used for, in order to avoid any breaches of public 
trust and comply with existing data protection laws.  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   10 

 
 
Mental health and wellbeing 
11 of the symptom-tracking applications ask at least one question about how the 
user is feeling, with the most common question being around feelings of anxiety. 
Given the potential effects that lockdown might be having on people’s mental 
health, questions on this topic could be useful to mental health researchers to 
produce research insights that can be used to support and promote positive 
mental health and well being. 
Outputs 
Given the range of stakeholders involved in the symptom trackers examined, it is 
no surprise that there are a variety of outputs that are being produced. Outputs 
seem to fall into three rough categories: 
Individual guidance  
Once a user has filled out the questionnaire, they are presented with a set of 
recommendations. Many of the applications, such as the ​CDC Symptom Checker​, 
provide simple recommendations such as to see a health specialist if the user 
records the presence of Covid-19 symptoms. 
Research insights  
Many of the initiatives are producing research insights. Some of these insights are 
shared with the user, like ​Your.MD’s tracker​, which gives a condition comparison 
after filling out the questionnaire, based on how you compare to other 
respondents. Other initiatives are sharing insights publicly, like the ​COVID 
Symptom Study​, which is producing visualisations such as how Covid-19 cases in 
the UK are changing day by day, or how they have changed specifically in the 
lockdown period. A number of the initiatives which are producing insights are also 
sharing data with health services, such as the NHS. ​Project Oasis​, for example, is 
a data intermediary which collects data from eight third-party applications and 
shares it with the NHS to support the response to Covid-19 in the UK. 
Improvements to existing services 
Some trackers, for example those that are part of wider health-related 
applications, are collecting Covid-19 data to improve their existing services, such 
as the support they can offer to individual users. These services aim to support 
users to improve their general health, rather than to specifically address Covid-19.  
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   11 

 
 
How does the data collected relate to  
the outputs? 
The level of detailed data required from users seems to differ greatly, depending 
on the outcome that the symptom trackers are trying to provide. For example, the 
Ink C-19 app​ requires only your location and an indication of whether you are well, 
have symptoms, have been diagnosed as sick, or have recovered from Covid-19. 
Once you have reported how you are feeling, a coloured circle representing your 
response appears on a map covering roughly a half-mile radius around your 
location, so other users of the application know that someone within that rough 
area has reported their status.  
 
In comparison, the ​Evergreen Life app​ – which operates as a general health and 
wellbeing application, but has now also integrated a Covid-19 check into its 
functionality – asks for more detailed information, such as your current symptoms, 
whether you have been tested, whether you have been in contact with someone 
who has tested positive, and whether you would like the information you have 
submitted to be shared for NHS research purposes. This approach has yielded 
outcomes​ such as visualisations of how the number of people reporting Covid 
symptoms has changed over time, or heatmaps of how many people in a 
particular area are following existing government guidelines. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   12 

 
 
The symptom-tracking  
data ecosystem 
Once we had completed the landscape review and data discovery exercises, we 
created two basic ecosystem maps to reflect what we had learned about the 
symptom-tracking data ecosystem.  
The UK symptom-tracking data ecosystem 
 
Example map of generic actors in the UK symptom tracking data ecosystem 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   13 

 
 
In the UK alone, we identified 11 applications that could be considered symptom 
trackers. The majority of these initiatives were initially established as standalone 
collaborations between a few organisations. In May 2020, ​jHub​, the Innovation 
centre for Strategic Command, were tasked with identifying Covid-19 symptom 
trackers and helping them to transfer relevant, anonymous data to ​NHSX​. This 
project is called ​Project Oasis​.  
 
Eight of the applications we identified have been verified as third-party suppliers 
by the NHS, and are sharing data as part of Project Oasis. These initiatives are: 
 
1.Agitate Ink C-19 
2.Connected Cognition 
3.Corona-Help UK 
4.Evergreen Life 
5.LetsBeatCovid-19 
6.TrackTogether 
7.Your.MD 
8.C-19 COVID Symptom Study 
 
In addition, the NHS has its own online symptom checker which is available at 
NHS 111 online​.  
Where is value being created in this example?  
The eight third party suppliers that are part of the Project Oasis initiative are 
sharing data to jHub. jHub cleans and anonymises the data, then shares it with 
NHSX. This data is being used by NHSX to inform their COVID-19 response by 
helping them to understand the spread of the virus across the UK.  
 
Each of these third party suppliers, and the other three initiatives – ​CEBM 
COVID-19 Symptoms Tracker​, ​Patient Access​ and ​Studybugs​ – are also using the 
data to create their own outputs, as described above. 
Barriers to impact 
One of the potential issues in this ecosystem is that while many of the third party 
applications are sharing data with NHSX via Project Oasis, and presumably with 
stakeholders involved in their own initiatives, there is very little transparency in 
what data has been collected, what is being shared  between different 
stakeholders, and for what purpose.  
 
The lack of visibility of what data is being collected could be stifling opportunities 
for collaborations between initiatives or with the research community more 
broadly. For example, researchers might have the skills or funding to try and 
address a particular research question, but might need access to data to help 
them do so. Without being able to see who is collecting useful data, researchers 
won’t know which organisations to approach about collaboration.  
 
The lack of transparency around how data is being used and shared also makes it 
very difficult for a user of the application to know what data about them is being 
used for and therefore make an informed decision about opting in or out of the 
service.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   14 

 
 
Opportunities 
Symptom trackers in the UK ecosystem could provide opportunities for other 
researchers or innovators by being more open about the data that they are 
collecting. They could make descriptions of the data or metadata openly available 
on their websites, or through their applications, and by publishing open data 
where possible. This behaviour change could be driven by the funders of the 
initiatives, who might be able to spend money more efficiently by encouraging 
collaboration, or by the initiatives themselves, in order to solve any challenges 
they face by bringing in additional support. Initiatives like TrackTogether and 
Studybugs are currently leading the way in creating an open culture around 
Covid-19 symptom data and are an example for others to follow.  
International variations 
This section outlines what we have seen happening in other countries. Given the 
limited range of applications that were identified outside the UK, this is not a 
comprehensive review of the international approach to Covid-19 symptom 
tracking.  
A single source approach 
In some countries, citizens have been encouraged to use one particular 
application. 
 
In Canada, the ​Canada Covid-19 App​ has been endorsed by Health Canada as 
the main application for Canadian citizens to use when checking symptoms or 
getting information about Covid-19. This allows the Canadian Government more 
control over how data is being collected about the pandemic, as well as an 
opportunity to disseminate information to citizens. 
 
In Vietnam, a very similar approach has been taken with the ​NCOVI app​, the 
official application of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Information and 
Communications to help people assess their symptoms and make decisions 
about seeing a health professional. The application is also used as an official 
channel for state agencies to send recommendations to the public about national 
and local changes.  
 
It is still likely that even if citizens are encouraged to use a particular application, 
that they could be using one or more alternative regional, national or international 
applications. This would likely be due to how outputs vary across applications. For 
example, parents of schoolchildren might find more value in an application that 
gives them tailored advice about their child and school, rather than one that 
recommends a national guidance.  
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   15 

 
 
A more collaborative approach 
 
Example map of generic actors in a more collaborative symptom tracking data 
ecosystem 
 
During this research, we were unable to find many good examples of where 
multiple symptom-tracking initiatives were working together to make data more 
accessible and produce insights about Covid-19. 
 
One example that came up was the model adopted by the ​Coronavirus Census 
Collective​, an international consortium calling for academics, health organisations, 
and medical professionals around the world to join them. The Coronavirus Census 
Collective recognises that in this unique situation, a centralised platform could 
provide a place for different symptom-tracking initiatives to connect and learn 
from each other’s approaches and findings.  
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   16 

 
 
Where is value being created in this example?  
As well as enabling knowledge sharing, the platform provides a collection, 
aggregation and analytics function, which allows organisations to contribute to a 
growing data resource. The resource can be used by all members of the initiative. 
This approach enables people who need to access data about Covid-19 
symptoms to find what they are looking for more easily.  
 
A more collaborative approach can also help to address some of the 
inconsistencies around standards for data that might prevent data reusers from 
using symptom data to create new solutions.  
 
Although the Coronavirus Census Collective data is being stored centrally, the 
outputs created by researchers and health professionals can still be tailored to 
their unique audiences.  
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   17 

 
 
Discussion 
It has been good to see a large number of symptom-tracking initiatives emerging 
in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. With multiple organisations aiming to 
address this global challenge, we are seeing a variety of useful insights, from 
information about ​local Covid-19 infection rates​ to better understanding of ​how 
the virus affects different people​, being produced as a result of their efforts.  
 
We believe that symptom trackers could unlock even more value from the data 
that they are collecting by collaborating with each other and sharing data. Better 
collaboration could provide data reusers with the opportunity to create new tools, 
guidance and approaches that researchers may not have the skills, expertise or 
resources to create themselves. However, our research has identified some major 
tensions that prevent collaboration and sharing of symptom-tracking data. 
Data discovery 
A key finding from this research is that the organisations behind 
symptom-tracking initiatives have not been very good at publishing information 
about the data that they are collecting. This limits the ability of data reusers to 
identify which organisations have useful datasets, and therefore who they should 
be approaching for collaboration.  
Legal complexities 
Negotiating legal terms for access to data can be complex – see the ODI’s ‘​Data 
trusts in 2020​’ blog post for more detail. Solving the complexities around 
negotiating access to data can incur a high cost and effort for both symptom 
trackers and data reusers who want to collaborate. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   18 

 
 
Technical barriers 
An absence of compatible sharing mechanisms makes it difficult for symptom 
trackers to share data with reusers, without investing time and money into 
enablement. A lack of data standards around symptom-tracking data means that 
even if data is shared, significant effort might be required by reusers before the 
data can be used to best effect. Authorities have been stressing ​the need for 
standardisation of Covid-19 data​ and some data standards do already exist (for 
example, most of the data that has been shared has been through json and csv 
formats), but more effort is needed to create new standards or adopt existing 
ones, such as the ​National Health Service SNOMED CT​ standard for clinical 
vocabulary use in electronic records. 
 
These barriers to sharing and collaboration could create unintended 
consequences for beneficiaries of symptom-tracking outputs. For example, unless 
they can access data from multiple symptom-tracking applications, data reusers 
can only draw data from a small portion of the target population. This could lead 
to outputs that don’t reflect the diversity in our communities, and potentially have 
a negative effect on users – for instance generalising, and therefore 
misrepresenting, the risks that certain symptoms present to individuals.  
Trust and trustworthiness 
The pandemic has provided a number of health and wellbeing initiatives with a 
unique opportunity to collect useful data about people, but the lack of clarity 
about why some questions – such as personal changes during lockdown –are 
being asked is a matter of concern. It is clear from the research that 
symptom-tracking initiatives are collecting symptom data for multiple purposes, 
including providing personalised guidance and improving research insights about 
the virus. But they might also be using this as an opportunity to improve existing 
products and services, or to build new ones.  
 
This in itself isn’t necessarily a bad thing, but much of the data that is being 
collected is sensitive health data about people; this makes it important for 
symptom trackers to collect and use data in a trustworthy and transparent way, so 
that they don’t unintentionally create harmful impacts for users. Our research has 
suggested that most symptom trackers could do a better job of communicating 
their purpose clearly and talking more openly about why they are collecting the 
information that they do.   
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   19 

 
 
Recommendations 
We want public health officials, medical researchers and other data reusers to be 
able to get access to and reuse data collected by symptom-tracking applications, 
so that they can create new tools and make better decisions about the Covid-19 
pandemic.  
 
Activities involved in enabling better access and reuse of symptom-tracking data 
include:  
 
●reducing the costs to application developers in providing 
symptom-tracking data 
●reducing the costs to data reusers in accessing and using 
symptom-tracking data 
●improving the understanding of application developers about the data 
needs of data reusers (for example which symptoms or other information 
needs to be collected to support operations or research,and  the required 
frequency or regularity of this data collection) 
●facilitating the discovery and negotiation of access to data between 
symptom-tracking applications and data reusers 
●enabling data reusers to accurately assess the quality, utility and 
trustworthiness of data from symptom-tracking applications based on 
factors such as coverage, how users are asked for information, whether 
they have good ethical practices, and so on. 
 
We believe that these outcomes can be facilitated through the creation of: 
 
●standards for sharing data​ from symptom-tracking applications 
●an enabling hub to facilitate interactions​ between symptom-tracking 
applications and data reusers, possibly including an audit and certification 
function. 
 
We also believe that it is important for the symptom-tracking initiatives themselves 
to be open and transparent about what data they are collecting (at a high level) 
and why they are collecting, in order to build trust with the wider public. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   20 

 
 
Standards for data 
Here we have summarised our thoughts on the importance of good standards for 
Covid-19 data. For a more detailed discussion, please read our blog post ‘​Data 
and Covid-19: why standards matter​’.  
 
The ODI offers a free resource: the ‘​Open standards for data guidebook​’, which 
can help data stewards to understand the different types of standards, and 
provides guidance on when to create standards – and when not to.  
 
Symptom trackers can create more interoperability without the need to start 
full-blown standardisation efforts. They can 
 
●check whether someone else has already published similar data, and 
whether they can follow a similar approach 
●if there is no precedent to follow, create clear and open documentation 
about the data they hold and how it is being structured, so others can 
follow the same approach. 
 
This can provide a blueprint to enable new initiatives to follow in successful 
footsteps, or support existing initiatives to adopt a similar structure to the data 
that they have collected, making it more compatible with a successful approach. It 
will also help reusers of the data to understand what shape the data is in before 
they attempt to use it themselves.  
 
Making adapters and other pipeline software open is another low effort, but useful 
way to increase interoperability in practice. For more information about the 
importance of standards and adaptors for Covid-19 symptom-tracking data, 
please read our ‘​Symptom tracking: standards and adaptors​’ guidance. 
 
Governments should: 
●In a time of crisis like this one, take an active role encouraging and helping 
increase interoperability by supporting collaboration on emerging 
standards 
●When government-funded organisations are acting as aggregators, they 
should whenever possible make the adapters and software they are using 
as open as possible, so that others can benefit from data from different 
sources 
●Outside of times of crisis, support standards infrastructure such as open 
standards organisations, so that standards can be available when needed 
and so that guidance can be available 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   21 

 
 
Enabling hub to facilitate interactions 
Whether you want to allow and nurture a rich decentralised ecosystem or 
champion a centralised approach, enabling the ecosystem of symptom trackers, 
data reusers and perhaps even beneficiaries to communicate and work together, 
is integral to making sure that all stakeholders are gaining collective value from 
data. 
 
The development of a hub could help to make Covid-19 data more discoverable, 
reduce coordination costs associated with negotiating appropriate access to data 
between symptom-tracking applications and data reusers and help foster the 
exchange of knowledge.  
 
Philanthropic funders, international public health organisations and government 
could/should play a stronger role in convening, funding these hubs, and 
maintaining knowledge there.  
 
The ODI has developed the ​Data Ecosystem Mapping tool​, which can be used to 
understand who is involved in the ecosystem, identify where data is being 
collected and shared, where other exchanges of value are occuring, and to 
understand the impacts of these interactions. We recommend that health policy 
organisations use this tool to understand the current state of the Covid-19 
symptom-tracking ecosystem and then use that understanding to consider what 
infrastructure needs to be built in order to enable the ecosystem to connect and 
collaborate more effectively. 
Building trust with the public through  
ethical approaches 
Symptom trackers need to make sure that as well as creating valuable outputs, 
they are protecting the rights and wellbeing of the people they are collecting data 
about, by being open and transparent about what data they are collecting and 
why, and using that data in an ethical way.  
 
Data ethics relates to good practice around how data is collected, used and 
shared. It is especially relevant when data activities have the potential to affect 
people and society, directly or indirectly. The ​Data Ethics Canvas​ is a tool 
developed by us at the Open Data Institute (ODI) that can help those collecting, 
sharing and using data identify and manage ethical issues.  
 
We recommend that symptom-tracking initiatives use the tool to: 
 
●understand the data that they need to collect for their purpose 
●explore the potential beneficial and harmful impacts of using this data 
●plan their engagement with stakeholders, including identified beneficiaries 
●integrate ethical practices into their project or initiative. 
 
We have discussed the importance of identifying and managing ethical issues 
around data during the pandemic in ​this blog post​.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   22 

 
 
Appendices 
Supporting documents 
●Research spreadsheet​, which includes:  
○A longlist of symptom tracking initiatives 
○The shortlisting process for data discovery 
○A breakdown of the types of questions asked by organisation type 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportExploring the Covid-19 symptom-tracking ecosystem   23 