

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20151

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20152

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20153
Executive summary 
Governments around the world are increasingly looking for ways to harness the potential of open 
data for improved policy-making, and social, economic and environmental benefit. A lot of work 
has been done to familiarise governments with open data and help them to publish open data. 
There has been less focus on the longer-term process of embedding open data as standard 
practice and how that might happen. Ensuring your open data initiative is sustainable is 
essential to realising the impact of open data. 
The  Open  Data  Institute  (ODI)  is  exploring  how  organisational  change  within  government  
happens to support and sustain open data in the long-term. Through extensive interviews and 
examination  of  the  literature  surrounding  organisational  change  management,  the  ODI  has  
developed  guidance  for  policy-makers  who  have  been  tasked  with  implementing  their  own  
open data initiatives. Thinking about the process of change management from the beginning 
of your initiative will be essential to realising the social, environmental and economic benefits 
of open data. 
The result: 12 recommendations to help governments sustain open data 
change and realise its impact
1. Articulate your vision, with clear examples of benefits open data will bring.
Start with a vision of the problem open data can help you solve, or the benefits you want to 
produce: think beyond simply releasing open data. Being able to connect your release of open 
data to a tangible benefit you would like to achieve can help people connect to the initiative 
and understand its value.
2. Secure support for your open data initiative from both senior/political leadership and 
government officials within departments before launch.
Build in mechanisms to educate government officials about open data, and explain its benefits, 
from the very beginning of your open data initiative. Fostering support for the change before 
launching an initiative will help encourage early uptake.
3. Combine top-down leadership for your open data initiative with support for individual 
or frontline champions in government. 
While senior buy-in is important to maintain open data as a priority, frontline champions are 
important to growing the initiative from the bottom up, and driving implementation of your open 
data vision.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20154
4. Build open communication and mechanisms for feedback into your open data initiative 
from the outset, both inside and outside government.
These could be formal mechanisms, like advisory groups, online feedback forms and regular 
meetings, and informal mechanisms, like social media outreach. Invite feedback and be open 
with your department(s) about the transition to using and producing open data, and how their 
work could be affected. This will ensure employees are more engaged and satisfied with the 
change.
5. Set out some quick wins for your open data initiative – like releasing a certain number 
of datasets as open data, or supporting a pilot use-case – but make sure these are part 
of a long-term goal for open data, which each department can align progress with. Linking 
quick wins to long-term goals can help maintain momentum for change.
6. Be flexible and responsive to the strengths and needs of different departments and 
teams.
Be clear on your long-term vision for open data, but be careful not to get locked into one 
transition plan for open data from the beginning. Look for examples of best practice in managing 
the transition to using and producing open data, and use these to help other departments. 
Being agile and responsive helps ensure the transition continues to align with any public sector 
reform and changing technologies.
7. Consolidate your change management efforts: use  your  emergent  leaders  as  peer  
educators and innovators. Keep building on your incremental quick wins as part of your 
long-term open data strategy. Consolidating efforts helps to make each element of change 
management more effective, and helps identify gaps in strategy. 
8.  Ensure  there  are  people  with  responsibility  for  change  management  –  supporting  
departments and coordinating feedback – as part of your open data team. 
Quite often, we think of a ‘change team’ as being set up to deliver open data objectives: build a 
portal, release datasets and stimulate reuse. Change management is an equally important part 
of the process, and can increase initial buy-in for the initiative, as well as a sense of ownership 
within departments of their open data efforts. 
9.  Seek  out  and  foster  stories  of  the  impact  of  open  data, to  help  illustrate  its  value  
for government implementers. Adjust your impact narrative or ‘business case’ for different 
departments,  so  it  makes  sense  in  terms  of  their  overall  visions,  capacities  and  existing  
processes. 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20155
10. Foster external support within industry, civil society and academia to drive continued 
demand for open data. External support can help to maintain political will to support open 
data, and be a source of ongoing learning and dialogue.
11. Introduce opportunities for civil servants to take part in ongoing learning about open 
data.
This could be through open data training, secondments to ‘best practice’ teams working with 
open data or regular workshops. It will help you continue to improve and expand the reach of 
your open data initiative.
12.  Build  metrics  to  regularly  evaluate  your  open  data  activities. This  will  help  you  to  
measure progress, benchmark success and identify areas for improvement.
The guidance is not absolute; some principles will be applied differently in different contexts. 
However, the principles for managing open data change that are set out in this paper should 
provide a useful framework or template for long-term thinking. 
This paper is the starting point for a deeper exploration of how change happens in government 
to support open data. Over the next 12-18 months, we will look to build on the themes and 
scope of this paper, through ongoing research and discussion with global leaders.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20156
Table of contents
Open data in a global context7
Understanding the structure of this paper7
10 principles for successful change management10
The seven countries interviewed: an overview of open government data12
1. Getting started: preparing to launch an open data initiative
Developing a shared vision and strategy
Building agreement for change
Combining top-down and bottom-up approaches to change
Getting a change team together
14
2. Following launch: harnessing enthusiasm for open data
Maintaining open communication and trust
Making chance sustainable and finding quick wins
Being agile and responsive
21
3. Embedding open data into normal government practice
Making change permanent
Learning from success stories
Maintaining the political will to support open data
Encouraging ongoing learning
Evaluating open data outcomes
28
Conclusion
33
About the Open Data Institute and the Partnership for Open Data
35
What do you think?
36
Appendix 1
37

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20157
Open data in a global context 
Open data has been embraced as a key transforming initiative by global government institutions. 
The introduction of the Open Government Partnership
1
 in September, 2011, aligned open data 
with a broader global commitment to open government. In 2013, G8 countries endorsed the G8 
Open Data Charter, committing to making public sector data ‘open by default’. Since then, the 
G8 Open Data Charter has been the foundation for other governments’ open data initiatives; 
for the promotion of open data principles in other international fora; and for the development 
of a potential international Open Data Charter.
The growth of the Open Government Partnership has been accompanied by an increase in 
projects designed to support and evaluate open data initiatives taking place internationally, 
which include the Partnership for Open Data. The World Bank Open Government Data 
Working Group introduced Open Data Readiness Assessments to help countries assess 
their preparedness to design and implement open data initiatives. The Web Foundation and 
International Development Research Centre (IDRC) are coordinating the Open Data Research 
Network, designed to help open data researchers around the world connect and share their 
experiences. The Open Data Barometer has provided a means of benchmarking different open 
data initiatives worldwide. 
This energy has fueled increasing awareness of open data around the world. Transforming 
open data from being something novel to normal for governments is the next challenge. The 
extent of the value that can be unlocked by open data will depend on the sustainability of 
each government’s open data initiative. The role of global organisations can be to ensure that 
such normalising is assessed and supported in the long-term to ensure sustainable benefits.
Understanding the structure of this paper
This paper focuses only on the organisational change aspect of implementing open data: what 
comes after its announcement or the first burst of excitement around it. It does not evaluate 
the impact of existing open data. Nor does it try to establish the criteria to make it successful, 
which is hard to define and will be different from country to country.
It is intended to prompt and frame discussion and future work in this area for the ODI and others. 
1 Open Government Partnership website: http://www.opengovpartnership.org 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20158
In future, we would like to expand our list of countries surveyed to at least 10, and increase 
the number of interviewees for each country. We will continue to explore ways to build on this 
first paper, and welcome feedback and suggestions. 
One clear insight from the interviews captured so far has been that that organisational change 
to support open data happens differently in different contexts. What worked in Estonia, for 
example, may not work in Chile. How the organisational change guidance offered by this 
paper can be applied will, to some extent, depend on the country context and the context of 
the public sector agency.   
The challenges inherent in structuring change management guidance for open data are reflected 
in the structure of this paper. We began with 10 common principles for change management, 
which we tested through interviews with government officials involved in open data initiatives. 
From these, we reached with our recommendations for open data change management. The 
resulting paper is separated into three parts: 
Part 1 - Getting started: preparing to launch your open data initiative
Part 2 - Following launch: harnessing enthusiasm for open data
Part 3 - Embedding open data into normal government practice
Several of the common principles for change management are important factors at more than 
one stage of an open data initiative. Where there is overlap, we have summarised all of the 
change management guidance that could apply. 
The interviews we undertook represent a small sample of the shift towards open data taking 
place within governments and organisations around the world. This paper is intended to 
support the work of policy-makers, and prompt a wider conversation about how governments 
can change their organisational practices to support open data. We look forward to building 
on our work on this area in 2015. 
How we came up with our guidance on sustaining open data change 
1. We started with a literature review
Over the past 50 years, a rich literature exploring organisational change management has 
emerged. Building on this work, this report aims to identify an organisational change framework 
that governments can apply in the context of open data. 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 20159
While  much  has  already  been  written  about  how  to  lead  large  organisational  cultural  
transformation  initiatives,  the  vast  majority  of  guidance  that  exists  comes  from  the  private  
sector.
2
 Organisational culture in the public sector can vary from the private sector considerably, 
so we approached private sector knowledge on organisational change with some caution. 
In search of guidance for public sector leaders, we drew on a wide range of literature, including 
traditional business management models, public sector reform theory and case studies on 
previous public sector digital transformation initiatives.
Drawing on this existing change management literature, we identified 10 common principles 
for change management to be tested through interviews and adapted for an open data context. 
2. We tested our literature review findings through interviews
All of those interviewed in each country were government officials tasked with helping to make 
the transition to using and producing open data. To identify a limited number of countries to 
survey, we considered the countries ranked highest in their region in the Open Data Barometer, 
2013. To this list, 2-3 countries were added that had recently undertaken significant open data 
activities, to ensure that countries from every region were represented. Within each country, 
one ‘visionary’ and one ‘implementer’ were identified to be interviewed. The ‘visionary’ was 
someone within or outside government who initiated, influenced and/or shaped interest in 
open data. The ‘implementer’ was someone in government who had been involved in carrying 
out the open data initiative.
In the first instance, we interviewed government officials from seven countries:
 
• The UK
• Estonia
• Republic of Korea
• Kenya
• Mexico
• Chile
• Macedonia
 
2 Burke, W. W., & Litwin, G. H. (1992) ‘A causal model of organisational performance and change’, Journal of Management, 
18(3), 523-545; Kotter, P. (1995) ‘Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail’, Harvard Business Review, 73(2), 59-67; 
Ackermann Anderson, L., & Anderson, D. (2010) Beyond change management: How to achieve breakthrough results through 
conscious change leadership, John Wiley & Sons.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201510
In the UK, we looked at open data change management on two levels: i) within an individual 
department – in this case, police.uk – and ii) across government, as part of the UK’s broader 
open data agenda, coordinated by the Cabinet Office. The first iteration of police.uk preceded 
the adoption of open data as official UK Government policy, and is considered an early open 
data success story.
 
Comparing open data initiatives at these two levels gave us some interesting insights into how 
different change management principles worked in different contexts. In any future iteration of 
this paper, it would be useful to expand on police.uk with comparisons of other departmental 
open data initiatives in the UK and elsewhere. 
10 principles for change management
These are the principles that were drawn from our review of the literature surrounding change 
management,  and  which  provided  a  starting  point  for  examining  change  management  in  
the context of open data. These principles were tested through interviews with government 
officials in seven countries. Based on the principles and interviews, we came up with our own 
recommendations for managing organisational change to support open data.
The common principles we began with were as follows. 
1. Build agreement for change
Build a “constituency for change”
3
 to help prepare the organisation for the change ahead. 
Anticipate barriers, plan training and develop supportive communications. 
2. Develop a shared vision and strategy
Share a vision that aligns with the ethos of the organisation. Involve staff in developing the 
vision, and communicate it often using different mediums and platforms. 
3. Get a ‘change team’ together to guide the change process 
The change team should be diverse, both in terms of skills and representation, with respected 
civil servants (‘insiders’) to ensure broad buy-in and solicit feedback. An external advisory 
group can also be helpful. 
4. Combine top-down and bottom-up leadership styles
Strong leadership and commitment from top levels of management should drive the vision 
3 Kelman, S. (2005) Unleashing Change: A study of organisational renewal in government, Brookings Institution Press

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201511
and initiate the change process, combined with an emergent style which harnesses bottom-
up knowledge and expertise.
5. Make change sustainable and find quick wins
To ensure you have long-term support for the transformation, plan for tangible results that 
can be achieved quickly and early. 
6.  Human  resources  and  structure  are  enablers,  not  barriers,  for  supporting  
transformation 
Modify structures, policies and incentives regarding hiring, job titles, rewards and skill-sets 
to align with the needs of your initiative. Incentivise behavioural change and leadership, allow 
staff to innovate, and empower individual agencies to develop their own open data solutions.
7. Maintain open communication and trust
Create an environment which supports two-way communication (via internal and external 
channels), so that critics and supporters have equal voice, and employees understand the 
objectives of the initiative and can make a serious contribution to the programme.
8. Become a learning organisation
Track progress and commitment to change, and demonstrate a readiness to admit mistakes 
publicly. Iterate and make changes quickly (“fail fast, fail cheaply”), while continually reviewing 
success metrics. 
9. Be agile and responsive
Embrace experimentation and innovation through rapid design and piloting before scaling-
up. Place ‘users’ at the core of any project design, and adjust plans based on regular user-
testing and reviews.
10. Monitor long-term change
Crowdsource stories from frontline data-users in different contexts to inspire your vision 
for how open data can bring benefits. Tap into external sources of support to encourage 
long-term engagement.
See Appendix 1 for full descriptions of these starting principles.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201512
3.  From  our  literature  review  and  interviews,  we  developed  our  recommendations  to  
sustain open data change
By testing our ‘10 common principles for change management’ against interviews with 
government officials in countries where open data initiatives had already been introduced, we 
have developed guidance to help policy-makers manage the transition to using and producing 
open data. Whether change is a linear process that should be followed step-by-step, or whether 
it  is  multi-directional,  is  a  question  that  divides  the  literature  around  organisational  change  
management.
4
 
Based on our interviews and literature review, we believe that the best approach may be to 
manage change as a number of interrelated elements, like having senior level leadership and 
internal feedback mechanisms, which can be applied in different combinations and at different 
times.
5
 Given the size and nature of the public sector, as well as some unique characteristics 
of open data (being cross-departmental, frequently coordinated by one central agency, with 
a high degree of IT involvement), it is unlikely that there will be opportunities to implement 
change management guidance in a strict sequence, progressing from step A to B to C.
The seven countries interviewed: an overview of open government
data
Mexico
Datos.gob.mx, the Mexican government’s official open data portal, was launched in July, 2014, 
with the help of the Partnership for Open Data, which brings together the World Bank, the 
Open Data Institute and Open Knowledge. The portal launched with 100 datasets: 10 from 
each of 10 selected government departments. Mexico is ranked 25th in the world and 3rd in 
the Americas in the Open Data Barometer, 2013. Open geographic and socio-economic data 
have allowed the National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL) 
to produce interactive maps showing how poverty and disadvantage are distributed across 
Mexico, so anyone can understand how their region compares to others.
4 Kotter, P. (1995) Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail, Harvard Business Review, 73(2), 59-67; Hiatt, J. M. 
(2006), ADKAR: A model for change business, government and our community, Prosci Research; Burke, W. W., &. Litwin, G. 
H. (1992) A causal model of organisational performance and change, Journal of Management, 18(3), 523-545
5 Ibid all

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201513
Estonia
Estonia’s Public Information Act mandates that data be made available in an open and machine-
readable form from 1 January, 2015, and a data portal has been piloted (opendata.riik.ee) 
to provide access to this data. While the portal is in its pilot phase, access is only available 
to a small number of datasets. However, a substantial amount of data is available via direct 
connection to Estonian government databases. In 2011/12, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and 
Communication estimated that there were around 20,000 datasets. The Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Communications is responsible for the portal, and for coordinating the process 
of making data from other Ministries’ available openly. In the Open Data Barometer, 2013, 
Estonia’s open data performance is ranked 14th in the world and 9th in Europe.
Republic of Korea (South Korea)
South Korea’s open data portal, data.go.kr, is managed by the National Information Society 
Agency and provides access to over 11,000 data files. The portal was introduced in 2011, the 
same year South Korea joined the Open Government Partnership, with the goals of empowering 
citizens, increasing transparency and harnessing new technologies for stronger governance 
and greater innovation. South Korea is ranked 12th in the world and third in the Asia-Pacific 
by the Open Data Barometer, 2013.
Kenya
In July, 2011, the Kenya Open Data Initiative was launched by President Mwai Kibaki, making 
key government data freely available to the public through a single online portal, opendata.
go.ke. By November, 2011, there were 390 datasets available through the portal. Open data in 
Kenya aims to drive innovation, generating economic and social value, to enable data-driven 
decision-making by parliamentarians and policy-makers, and to improve transparency and 
accountability. The Ministry of Information and Communications and the ICT Authority are 
responsible for the portal. Kenya was ranked 1st in Africa and 22nd in the world by the Open 
Data Barometer, 2013. 
Chile
Chile’s open data portal, datos.gob.cl, was launched in 2012, alongside a presidential mandate 
committing the state to publishing data in open and reusable formats. At the time, officials 
and Ministers cited the benefits for the community through access to information on traffic, 
health service and schools, as well as for the strength of democracy in Chile. The Ministry of 
the Secretary General of the Presidency (MINSEGPRES) was responsible for setting up the 
portal, working with other departments to add new datasets. The portal now provides access 
to 1,180 datasets. In the Open Data Barometer, 2013, Chile’s open data performance was 
ranked 25th in the world and 4th in the Americas.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201514
Macedonia
Macedonia’s open data portal, opendata.gov.mk, was launched  in 2012 as part of the process 
of becoming a member of the Open Government Partnership, an international community of 65 
countries committed to making government more transparent, accountable and responsive to 
citizens. In addition to the Open Government Partnership, Ministers highlighted the potential for 
open data to drive innovation, leading to economic benefits in Macedonia. The portal currently 
hosts 154 datasets and is managed by the Ministry for Information Society and Administration.
UK (Cabinet Office)
The UK’s open data portal, data.gov.uk, was launched in 2009 by then Prime Minister Gordon 
Brown, to provide opportunities for business, increase transparency and empower consumers. 
The Cabinet Office was responsible for implementing the portal and coordinating other 
departments’ contributions. Today, data.gov.uk includes 15,888 published datasets.The UK 
was ranked number one in the Open Data Barometer, 2013, both within Europe and globally. 
Applications of open data in the UK include transport mapping apps, flood alert services and 
rankings of many services, including schools, GPs and dentists.
UK (police.uk and data.police.uk)
In 2009, the UK’s National Policing Improvement Agency launched maps.police.uk – the first 
time policing data had been made available via an application programming interface (API) to 
developers. This service evolved into data.police.uk, and has since grown to include over 19 
million rows of data. The Home Office now publishes the data, coordinating data provided by 
43 police forces across England, Northern Ireland and Wales, as well as the Ministry of Justice.
Part 1
Getting started: preparing to launch an open data initiative 
An open data initiative can begin in many different ways. It could be initiated by a directive from 
the President or Prime Minister, following a meeting of the Open Government Partnership. It 
could be prompted by pressure from developers and startups for the government to release 
data for use to build services and apps. Alternatively, it could stem from an obligation to release 
open data as part of a regional or international agreement, like transposition of the European 
Union’s Directive on Reuse of Public Sector Information 2013 (PSI) by EU member states. 
Whatever the reason, the policy-maker tasked with transitioning a government department – or 
all government departments – towards publishing the data they hold as open by default will 
come up against some organisational culture resistance. While there are significant potential 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201515
social, economic and environmental benefits to be unlocked with this transition, policy-makers 
often need to convince government of the importance of open data first. 
This section examines how to build in change management into any open data project from 
the outset. 
Developing a shared vision and strategy
A common failing in change programmes noted in the organisational change management 
literature is the lack of a long-term vision for change.
6
 Such a vision should be an anchor for 
performance improvement objectives, and to formulate specific initiatives (Ostroff 2006). This 
also involves carefully articulating the mission, to guide the transformation effort and remind 
staff of that mission as the project progresses.
7
 
We  found  from  our  interviews  that  more  support  can  usually  be  gained  for  open  data  
implementation in countries where open data was introduced as part of a vision for solving 
a clearly-defined problem, or tied to a specific political goal or concern on the government’s 
agenda. 
In Macedonia, for example, open data was framed as a way to kickstart “innovative potential, 
job creation and economic value”. In Kenya, open data was presented as a way to address 
youth unemployment and social engagement. 
“One of the things we’ve learned is that we have to make an argument that works [for] 
the government[...] It’s a question of just finding what is the best place to start out as an 
organisation for a different audience, and how to package it for each audience.” Kenya
“This agenda will wither and die if it is seen as just an add-on or an additional burden for 
people. I think we need to make it fundamentally relevant to what people are doing [...] 
It seems to me that the only ways we develop are by requiring departments to use their 
own open data, to consume their own open data, otherwise there’s no incentive to make 
it any better [...]” UK (Cabinet Office)
Sometimes, what might begin as a short-term project with a specific vision can evolve into a 
longer-term vision with broader impact. This vision may also adapt as the problems and goals 
6 Page, J., Pearson, J., Jurgeit, B., & Kidson, M. (2012) Transforming Whitehall departments, Institute for Government; 
Ostroff, F. (2006) Change management in government, Harvard Business Review, 84(5) pp. 141-7;Fernandez, S., Rainey, H.G. 
(2006) Managing successful organisational change in the public sector, Public Administration Review, March/April, 168-176.
7 Ibid.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201516
of government change over time, such as a shift of focus from transparency towards economic 
growth or efficiency, especially if a new administration takes over. The vision underpinning an 
open data project does not have to be rigid, but it should be meaningful and measurable for 
different stakeholders engaged in its implementation. The evolution of open data publication 
by police.uk offers an interesting example of how a vision for open data can evolve over time.
Case study: The evolution of open data within police.uk
“We actually started this journey a long time ago, before the open data movement really 
got going. Twitter was new, and the Twitter API was available and lots of people were 
building things off of it. So we thought, ‘What if we could do the same with the maps.police.
uk data?’ If we made this available via an API, people could build great things with it [...] 
No one within the organisation was that interested, because at the time the whole open 
data movement didn’t really exist [...] There was quite a lot of interest though from the 
public, from developers, some newspapers – the Guardian in particular – so, from outside 
the organisation it was very well received.
Then [after a short while] the Chief Constable in charge of neighbourhood policing came 
to the team with the task of making more information publicly accessible. Some research 
had been done about the public’s fear of crime, that it was increasing while crime levels 
were actually decreasing. We started discussions with the deputy Chief Constable about 
how more release of information about crime could be coordinated across the 43 local 
forces in England and Wales. We wanted to give people more meaningful information 
about what crime was happening in their areas, and hopefully combat those fears. 
From the beginning, it wasn’t just about giving access to open data. At first, back before 
open data was really a concept, we were thinking in terms of its commercial potential, 
ways the developer community could build on it. Then it became about giving people 
meaningful interpretations of that data and educating them on crime. What’s the role 
government should play ultimately? Is it simply about releasing the information for anyone 
to play with, and build on, or is it about explaining it to the public as well? The success of 
police.uk was partly because accessibility for the public, and a vision of how open 
data would help them, was built in from the beginning – it was part of providing a 
service, a cornerstone of standard police service.” UK (police.uk)
Where there was no clear vision of the problems open data could help us to respond to, and 
which benefits it might realise, interviewees spoke of facing apathy from within the public sector 
towards the initiative, and difficulties faced during the publication of open data. Visions that 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201517
simply focused on the publication of a certain target number of datasets (seeing open data 
as an end in itself, rather than a means to an end), quickly ran into difficulties. 
“As a presidential mandate obliged the institution to publish five datasets, the Open 
Data Portal grew exponentially in its number of datasets within six months. But the 
same mandate didn ́t oblige institutions to keep those datasets up-to-date, so a lot of 
institutions didn ́t do it. The challenge now is working with those institutions that have 
already published once and updating the datasets, knowing that the person in charge 
of publishing has probably changed, due to the change in presidency last year.” Chile
Recommendation: Articulate your vision. Start with a vision of the problem open data can 
help you solve, or the benefits you want to produce. Think further than simply releasing 
open data. Being able to connect your release of open data to a tangible benefit you’d like to 
achieve can help people connect to the initiative and understand its value.
Building agreement for change
A common principle across the literature around organisational change management is to 
‘foster change readiness’: build agreement for a constituency for change as a first step of 
creating the change movement in an institution (Kelman, 2005). One interesting aspect of the 
adoption of open data policies in many countries surveyed – and a common factor in public 
sector reform – is the introduction of a mandate by external political leadership. There may 
be no time to foster change readiness ahead of the announcement of the open data initiative. 
“The presidential election brought a change of government. The new President believed 
in the importance of opening up data as part of what we call ‘government 3.0’. The new 
policy meant sharing and collaborating on information held by government.” South Korea
Several officials interviewed in countries including Kenya, Macedonia, the Republic of Korea, 
Chile and Mexico talked about their open data policies being initiated on instructions from 
the President or a senior Minister. For some, the impetus for open data change was their 
country joining or hearing about the Open Government Partnership. Every country interviewed, 
regardless of whether the idea of open data came from their political leadership, agreed that 
getting senior level buy-in for the initiative was the first, and most important, step towards 
establishing an open data initiative in their organisation.
“It’s about getting the politicians onside.” Kenya 
“There’s a multi-layer approach to open data: you need the political figure who will make 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201518
the commitment, the Minister or President, who understands what the concept is and its 
benefits, and who can give the green light. Then you have the second layer of important 
people in each institution, who are usually the heads of departments or heads of units, 
who know what data their institution generates.” Macedonia
This top-down approach can leave little time to foster change readiness within the wider civil 
service, ahead of introducing the open data initiative. This is to a great extent simply part of 
the nature of public sector change, there is often no way to avoid it. But being prepared to 
combine that senior or political level support for change with outreach across departments can 
be crucial to the initiative’s long-term success. In the literature around organisational change 
management, several authors including Cameron, Kotter, Armenakis et al
8
  state  that  a  key  
part of preparing for change in institutions is identifying potential barriers to success early on, 
and designing training or other orientation programmes accordingly to pre-empt resistance.
“There are a lot of people who just don’t know what open data is, so if a mandate comes 
and says you have to open your data and these are the ways you’re going to do it, they 
just don’t get it. We think you have to work first on getting everybody or most people 
understanding what you’re talking about, and then maybe come up with a mandate.” Chile
The most common barriers to change identified by all interviewees were a lack of buy-in or 
understanding of open data within government departments – in essence, a lack of ‘change 
readiness’.
Recommendation: Secure  support  for  your  open  data  initiative  from  both  senior/
political leadership and government officials within departments before launch. Build in 
mechanisms to educate government officials about open data, and explain its benefits, from 
the very beginning of your open data initiative. Fostering support for the change ahead of its 
launch is important for early uptake of the initiative.
Combining top-down and bottom-up approaches to change
Generally, approaches to change can be classified as top-down or planned (either responding 
to external influences, or to achieve a desired objective), or bottom-up or emergent (dynamic, 
continuous and arising from existing practice and knowledge).
9
 The literature in our organisational 
8 Cameron, E., Green, M. (2004) Making Sense of Change Management, Kogan Page Publishers;
Kotter, P. (1995) Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail, Harvard Business Review, 73(2), 59-67; Armenakis et. al, 
(1999) Organisational change: A review of theory and research in the 1990s,  Journal of Management, 25(3), 293-315
9 Kelman, S. (2005) Unleashing change: A study of organisational renewal in government, Brookings Institution Press; 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201519
change management literature review broadly advocates combining both planned and emergent 
approaches. This can help you to encourage front-line innovation by departments implementing 
their open data obligations, while sustaining top-down support for the change agenda. Even in 
the public sector, where change can be driven by external political forces, there can be space 
during implementation of the change to innovate and adapt.
“It can be extremely top-down. The direction and priorities come from Ministers. What 
we have started getting better at doing is, even when there is that top-down direction on 
something, trying to reverse-engineer user engagement.” UK (police.uk)
Crucially, the team behind police.uk’s open data initiative made securing top-down support 
for the transition a key focus ahead of any public outreach. A Chief Constable leading police.
uk was given responsibility for liaising with senior members of the force and convincing them 
of the initiative’s importance. A communications/public relations role complemented this with 
a focus on the front lines, encouraging individual police forces to provide access to their data, 
understand any blockers and address any concerns. 
Identifying and fostering open data champions within government to grow the initiative from 
within (emergent leadership) and deliver on its promise is essential. Every country interviewed 
indicated that simply having top-down leadership on open data hadn’t been sufficient. Ensuring 
government departments have enough flexibility or agility to lead from within on implementation 
of open data, and help shape its development, can be key to long-term sustainability of the 
agenda. 
“There’s an equilibrium that you need to have, because the political will or the political 
mandate sometimes might come through a law or a presidential instruction, and that’s top-
down. But you actually have to be working [with] the people from [all levels of government]. 
You have to find an equilibrium and I’m working on that.” Chile
Recommendation:  Combine  top-down  leadership  for  your  open  data  initiative  with  
support for individual or frontline champions. While senior buy-in is important to maintain 
open data as a priority, frontline champions are important to grow the initiative from the bottom 
up, and drive implementation of your open data vision.
Getting a change team together
Fernandez, S., Rainey, H.G., (2006) Managing successful organisational change in the public sector, Public Administration 
Review, March/April, 168-176.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201520
Assembling a team to administer the government’s open data initiative was a common priority 
within all countries surveyed. The size of that team and extent of its function depended on 
the role it saw itself playing in the transition to open data. In Chile, for example, the central 
agency’s coordination team was very small, and its functions were separate from those of the 
individual departments with responsibility for publishing data. The coordination team focused 
on developing the government’s open data policy and building an open data portal.
In the Republic of Korea, there are several teams involved in open data policy. The open data 
centre has three teams: open data planning, open data utilisation and the open data core/
technical team. Their Big Data Centre also deals with open data. Again, each of the teams play 
a central coordination role and encourage the release of open data by individual departments. 
While all of the countries surveyed assembled a task force or team to manage the open data 
process – developing a policy, building a portal, stimulating reuse of open data – few countries 
also focused on relationship management within government as part of their ‘change team’ 
responsibilities. The organisational change management literature suggests convening a 
change team, who are responsible for soliciting feedback from within and outside government, 
monitoring performance and identifying obstacles, and participating in the design or redesign 
of activities.
10
 
The country surveyed that did indicate some focus on relationship management as part of its 
‘change team’ was the UK: 
“There has been, since the beginning, a transparency and open data team. It hasn’t always 
been structured in exactly the same way, but probably similar functions performed over 
time. You have a group of people who are relationship managers, and they provide the 
support to different departments. Each of those people have a portfolio of departments 
they look after, and they’re responsible for making sure those departments are meeting 
their open data commitments. They’re sort of on call to help them out, they attend each 
department’s sector transparency board meetings and so on. Alongside relationship 
management,  the  team  does  things  like  policy  formulation,  engagement  in  the  Open  
Government Partnership (OGP) and separately has technical experts working on data.
gov.uk.” UK (Cabinet Office)
Recommendation: Ensure the core open data team includes people with responsibility 
for change management – supporting departments and coordinating feedback – as part of 
your open data team. Quite often, we think of a ‘change team’ being set up to deliver open 
10 Kotter, P. (1995) Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail, Harvard Business Review, 73(2), 59-67

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201521
data objectives: build a portal, release a target number of datasets and stimulate reuse. Change 
management is an equally important part of the process, and can increase initial buy-in for 
the initiative, as well as a sense of ownership within departments of their open data efforts.
Part 2
Following launch: harnessing enthusiasm for open data
Maintaining open communication and trust
In the early stages of an open data initiative, generating interest in and enthusiasm for open 
data among other parts of the public service is essential; as is fostering interest from the private 
sector and citizens. Encouraging internal participation and consultation can play an important 
role  when  making  the  case  for  organisational  change,  mitigating  resistance  and  creating  
psychological ownership.
11
 Nearly every country interviewed mentioned ways in which – as 
part of their open data initiative – they tried to foster an environment of open communication 
and trust. 
“There’s  a  push  for  civil  servants  to  be  more  innovative,  to  reach  out  of  their  typical  
comfort zones and not be people who just sit at their desks, in front of their computers. 
It’s  important  to  get  out  there,  to  work  out  what  the  current  conversation  is,  work  out  
where the energy is and how people are thinking. Create or identify useful networks of 
reformers and innovators who can help you advance the agenda.” UK (Cabinet Office)
Several initiatives have quickly introduced mechanisms to support dialogue between public 
sector organisations releasing data, and the wider reuse community. This dialogue can help 
government departments prioritise data for release based on user demand, respond to feedback 
about data quality or format issues, and understand how their data is being used. In Chile, 
what was originally intended as a one-off meeting between government data publishers and 
members  of  the  wider  reuse  community  is  being  reconsidered  as  a  regular  opportunity  to  
share experiences:
“Recently we held a meeting with open data publishers across government institutions, 
journalists, NGOs and universities so they could explain to government what they were 
doing with open data and see the potential of this work. Often, governments don’t actually 
get to see what’s getting done with data their portals. Afterwards we asked the civil 
11 Nadler, D. A. (1998) Champions  of  change:  How  CEOs  and  their  companies  are  mastering  the  skills  of  radical  
change, Jossey-Bass; Nadler, D.A. et.al (1998) Navigating change: How CEOs, top teams, and boards steer transformation, 
Harvard Business School Press; Johnson, G., Leavitt, W. (2001) Building on Success: Transforming organisations through an 
appreciative inquiry, Public Personnel Management, 30(1), pp. 129 – 136

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201522
servants questions like, ‘Did you know there were journalists using your data?’ and ‘Did 
you know there were students and NGOs who were using your data?’ – and they didn’t 
know, they hadn’t thought about it.
“[...] It makes the work more rewarding, because they’re not just going through a mechanical 
process, but someone is actually doing something with the data. Now we’re trying to 
make those meetings happen every two months, so the government can continue to see 
the potential of their release of data as open data.” Chile
In the UK, a formal voice for the open data user was established by the Cabinet Office in 2012, 
called the Open Data User Group (ODUG). Comprising members from across the UK open 
data community, both non-commercial and commercial, ODUG provides advice to the Cabinet 
Office on funding for open data, undertakes research to build a business case for open data 
and provides a mechanism for open data users to request and prioritise the release of data 
by government. A formal request mechanism is one way to establish a line of communication 
between organisations releasing open data, and those interested in using it. 
Case study: The UK Open Data User Group data request process
The request process, launched in October 2012, has accumulated 564 requests for release 
of datasets as open data, as well as 330 confidential requests.
12
 Citizens or businesses 
making requests set out the data they would like released, the barriers they had experienced 
accessing this data and what they would do with the data. The Cabinet Office Transparency 
Team manages initial receipt of the requests, filtering out and responding to requests which 
are misguided (for example, those that are not requests for a dataset); or outside the scope 
of the request mechanism (because the data is not held by a publicly funded body). Where 
the request is for data that is already available as open data, but there are issues accessing it, 
the transparency team will raise these issues with the data publisher. Issues might include the 
dataset not being up to date, the link being broken or poor data quality. If there is a request 
for data that is not available as open data, the transparency team consults with ODUG and 
departments to understand if it can be released. 
Structured mechanisms for dialogue between government and the reuse community, like data 
user groups and data request processes, can contribute to an environment of trust and open 
communication. Transparency about these kinds of mechanisms – about decisions made, 
discussions that take place and genuine opportunities for engagement – will be key to their 
success. 
12 Data.gov.uk data requests: http://data.gov.uk/data-request, accessed on 2014-12-18

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201523
Governments should not stop at creating formal mechanisms, but consider ways to embed 
a culture of open communication across open data service delivery in general. There is no 
one-size-fits-all mechanism to capture perspectives and feedback from outside government. 
As one interviewee observed of the UK data request process, 
“Our data request process is probably a great illustration of the fact that government isn’t 
best-placed to identify what data people want. An early request was from a surf report 
and beach weather website, who wanted data on which days the Ministry of Defence 
(MoD) would be using beaches for firing practice. Having this information would help them 
best advise users on safety, planning their trips and would also save the MoD time having 
to move surfers from the water before beginning practice. We were able to release this 
data, proving that individuals can make direct approaches to government so we hear their 
needs as well as what the open data community is interested in.” UK (Cabinet Office)
Ensuring government policies and services are set up more generally to encourage and receive 
external feedback is important. In the case of the specific open data initiative from police.uk,
“One challenge for government departments has been the policy barriers that can prevent 
them from engaging in the different types of conversations going on – through social 
media, for example. We need to make sure that other departmental policies don’t work 
against them getting the feedback that they need.” UK (police.uk)
Sometimes a key barrier to encouraging open communication between government and the 
open data community can be that the community simply doesn’t know what government holds. 
Encouraging public sector organisations to be transparent about their data holdings from the 
outset of an open data initiative can help engender ongoing trust. Potential collaborators and 
developers can more readily engage with governments when they have an understanding of 
the types of data that institutions hold from the outset. 
While nearly all of the initiatives examined through interview have considered ways to encourage 
trust and open communication between the reuse community and public sector organisations, 
it is less clear whether similar mechanisms have been put in place within the public sector 
organisation itself, or across departments. In their evaluation of change initiatives in six 
Australian public sector agencies, Stewart & Kringas
13
 found a correlation between the degree 
of consultation and acceptance of change. Establishing an internal steering committee could 
13 Stewart, J., & Kringas, P. (2003) Change management: Strategy and values in six agencies from the Australian public 
service, Public Administration Review, 63(6), pp 675-688

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201524
help  share  information  about  open  data  changes,  and  provide  a  mechanism  for  employee  
feedback. 
Every open data initiative surveyed in this paper, with the exception of police.uk, was coordinated 
by central government departments for implementation by the wider public sector. This 
coordinating role may make implementing similar mechanisms for internal, cross-departmental 
feedback difficult. It is unclear from the interviews whether departments coordinating open 
data initiatives also implemented internal mechanisms for communication. In the UK, there are 
sector transparency boards for several sectors (health, justice and environment) who provide 
advice and communicate directly with departments. Other internal mechanisms may simply 
not have been raised in the interviews, and may warrant further exploration.
Recommendation: Build open communication and mechanisms for feedback into your 
open data initiative from the outset, both inside and outside government. These could be 
formal mechanisms – like advisory groups, online feedback forms and regular meetings – and 
informal mechanisms, like social media outreach. Inviting feedback and being open with your 
department(s) about the transition to open data and how their work practices could be affected 
can increase the likelihood of open data reuse, employee engagement and satisfaction with 
the change. 
Making change sustainable and finding quick wins
The literature tells us that taking a ‘big bang’ approach to open data could end badly.
14
 Instead, 
there is general consensus that taking an incremental approach to organisational change around 
open data – focused on tangible results that can be achieved quickly – is important to long-
term success. Every initiative we surveyed demonstrated a focus on quick wins in open data. 
For several countries, quick wins involved getting a data portal up and running, with some 
useful government data sets published on it. Opendata.go.ke, the Kenyan Government open 
data portal, was proposed, developed and launched by a government task force in less than 
three months.
“What happened was that we went and saw the permanent secretary, [who said the data 
was there and went to the President, who said]  ‘OK good, I’ll launch it on May 7th’ and 
that was literally six weeks out [...] So we started, and I can tell you we ran like hell.” Kenya
14 Osborne, D., Plastrik, P. (1997) Banishing Bureaucracy: The five Strategies for Reinventing Government, Addison 
Wesley

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201525
Quick wins that give structure to an open data initiative and a tangible output can be key to 
sustaining energy for open data. 
“You know the problem with governments in general is that [they] suffer from inertia, and 
the only way to break inertia is by getting something started. So one of the things that 
happened is, based on the fact that we launched opendata.go.ke [...], the next year we 
were in campaign mode, and the electoral commission then started publishing data relating 
to the elections, because now they had an example [to look to].” Kenya
One  challenge  associated  with  establishing  a  government  data  portal  is  how  to  maintain  
momentum. To ensure new datasets continue to be added, existing datasets are updated, 
quality continues to improve and, ultimately, an active reuse community thrives around it with 
social, economic and environmental benefit. For several interviewees, setting up an open data 
portal for central government was very much a quick win, but seen as part of a wider public 
sector open data strategy, it could equally be described as a big bang. 
In contrast, recommendations from police.uk are to “start small”:
“Start small, get something out there, prove a minimum viable pilot, get people using it, 
get the feedback and build momentum from there. My only advice would be start small, 
do something quick and dirty. You don’t need a big team to do it.” UK (police.uk)
Several countries surveyed who established government wide open data portals early on (a 
big bang), only to lose momentum, are now focused on improving data quality and ensuring 
departments continue to publish open data. 
“The idea was to get the portal started and to start talking about open data in government, 
because it was really new – it’s still something new – for many public institutions. So that 
goal was achieved. They wanted an open data portal, they wanted institutions to start 
to publish, and they did a really good job in getting around 200 institutions publishing in 
a couple of months. The thing is because they didn’t work in culture change, that didn’t 
evolve into a living open data portal. You have a couple of institutions that are doing 
really good work, and then you have a couple of institutions that only published what was 
required by law and then stopped.” Chile
Having  a  clear  plan  for  quick  wins  as  part  of  a  broader,  phased  approach  to  open  data  is  
important. Plan ahead – pick your low hanging fruit, and consult your plan on how to climb 
higher. This incremental approach to quick wins as part of a longer-term strategy has been 
implemented in Mexico. The Estrategia Digital Nacional, or ‘National Digital Strategy’ has 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201526
created a structured approach to implementing their open data initiative, via Data Squads.
Case study: Mexico’s Data Squads
In Mexico, the Office of the President formed a programme called Data Squads to accelerate 
the roll-out of open data across government. Data squad members deliver intensive training 
to targeted government departments to rapidly introduce open data principles. In 42 days, 
the squads successfully opened 100 datasets across 10 federal agencies, demonstrating the 
power of this intensive approach. The Data Squads are focused on quick wins – selecting 
achievable targets within agencies that could provide tangible examples of success. The focus 
now is on making sure the Data Squads programme is sustainable. Currently, National Digital 
Strategy is considering a ‘train the trainer’ approach to continue to proliferate Data Squads 
across government and manage squad member turnover. 
Recommendation: Set out some ‘quick wins’ for your open data initiative, like releasing 
a certain number of datasets as open data, launching a portal or supporting a pilot use case - 
but make sure these are part of a long-term goal for open data, that each department can 
align progress with. Linking quick wins to long-term goals can help you maintain momentum 
for change. 
Being agile and responsive
A lean ‘agility’ approach to government has emerged as a key aspect of public service delivery, 
particularly in the digital sphere.
15
 Being agile means having the space to innovate and adapt. 
The UK Institute for Government’s recent work on reforming Whitehall
16
 recommends a hybrid 
approach to organisational change, which emphasises flexibility and adaptability (‘innovation’) 
while retaining a commitment to scale and collaboration across government. Both of these 
aspects are present in the central government open data initiatives surveyed. They all began 
with  a  commitment  to  scale  across  government  and  have  tried  to  facilitate  collaboration  
between and within departments, to progress an open data initiative.
17
A key challenge for several of the countries surveyed has simply been the size of government. 
Change takes time, and it is difficult if not impossible to reach every stakeholder in each 
15 Page, J. et. al (2011) System error: Fixing the flaws in government IT, Institute for Government
16 Page, J. et. al (2012) Transforming Whitehall: Leading major change in Whitehall departments, Institute for Government
17 With the exception of police.uk: www.police.uk, which still incorporated scalability but across police.uk and 
departments with complementary data assets.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201527
department and agency who has a role to play in an open data initiative. 
Where an open data initiative has been coordinated by a central agency (like the Prime Minister 
or President’s office) flexibility is something that, to a certain extent, can only be encouraged of 
other departments. Central agencies coordinating an initiative for the whole of government may 
not have a publishing role. The central agency is essentially playing a relationship management 
role, coaxing departments to release more data and become more agile to maintain a data-
user focus, review and iterate often and respond to reuser feedback. This made it difficult to 
draw specific examples of how a lean, agile approach had assisted with organisational change 
management to support open data from the interviews. Nonetheless, several interviewees 
commented  on  how  evolution  and  adaptation  of  their  plans  in  response  to  feedback  was  
important. In Chile, as one interviewee commented,
“Plans can change a lot. We’ve just finished planning for next year, and I know there [are] 
some things we’re planning that may not get done because things change. You have 
to be able to improvise and come up with other solutions. For example, if the people in 
charge of publishing data had told me that [the] first meeting we held with them and the 
reuser community [hadn’t worked], we would have to change our approach. Thankfully 
we have the opposite problem – they want more. We have a strategy of course, but we 
have to be able to innovate within our own strategy.” Chile
Police.uk, being an agency-specific open data initiative, was able to build agility and 
responsiveness into its service delivery more directly. From the outset, user feedback was a 
key element of platform development.
“There were feedback questionnaires on the website from day one. We used social media, 
went to town hall meetings [and held] outreach sessions. We couldn’t deliver on all 
demands, but tried to respond to many. Lots of the developments on police.uk were the 
result of this feedback, like greater accuracy of data and greater granularity. We started 
incorporating different datasets to add points of interest – like shopping centres, car 
parks and cinemas – to build up a richer picture of the data. We also started adding more 
support and advice for people using the data.” UK (police.uk)
Recommendation: Do  not  get  locked  into  one  transition  plan  for  open  data  from  the  
beginning. Be clear on your long-term vision, but be flexible and responsive to the strengths 
and needs of different departments and teams. Look for examples of best-practice managing the 
transition to open data and use these to help other departments. Being agile and responsive helps 
ensure the transition continues to align with any public sector reform and changing technologies. 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201528
Part 3
Embedding open data into normal government practice
It is difficult to sustain the same level of energy and enthusiasm for any policy change, let 
alone open data, as time passes. Eventually, the open data initiative has to become a part of 
normal government practice. Few countries are at this stage yet with open data, because open 
data is relatively new everywhere. The literature review findings indicate that there are several 
elements that could support long-term sustainability of an open data initiative and broader 
organisational change movement, including:
• consolidating change over time, institution by institution; and
• building on ongoing learning and reflection.
From the interviews, we found considerable support for these concepts, but due to the relative 
‘newness’ of open data, few examples of these being put into practice. There are high levels of 
support for rolling out ongoing education and training programmes for civil servants in order 
to broaden the support base for open data. Learning approaches that involve demonstrations 
and crowd-sourcing practical examples of use of open data appear to be most effective.
Making change permanent 
There are various ways of consolidating organisational change, and reducing cultural barriers. The 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has suggested highlighting 
the economic value-add of open data, crowdsourcing the experience of civil servants and local 
governments  working  with  open  data  at  the  frontline,  and  building  new  capabilities  that  aid  
implementation of open data.
18
 Another recommended approach is to facilitate exchange visits 
or short-term secondments by staff to high-performing institutions already using open data, to 
promote learning and overcome resistance.
19
Several interviewees emphasised the importance of consolidating quick wins to prove the open 
18 Ubaldi, B. (2013) Open  government  data:  Towards  empirical  analysis  of  open  government  data  initiative, OECD 
Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 22, OECD Publishing; Yui, C., Fink, S. (2013) Smaller, Better, Faster, Stronger: 
Remaking government for the digital age, Policy Exchange
19 Ostroff, F. (2006) Change management in government, Harvard Business Review, 84(5), pp.141-147

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201529
data concept and foster long-term support. For example, police.uk leveraged the success of 
their earlier maps.police.uk open data project to collect feedback and make the case for scaling 
up activities:
“It was hugely important to have a quick win [maps.police.uk open data project]. We built 
data.police.uk, [about] three and a half, maybe even four years after the launch of the 
original API. And you know, people had built applications based on it, people had built 
websites using it, we had people building businesses around it and selling on the data. 
So, when it came to [making] the decision to rebrand all of that as data.police.uk, and 
[putting] more time and resources into it, we had a huge amount of evidence that it was a 
good idea from a policy point of view, but also that it was useful to people. People were 
using it, and there was going to be a lot of uptake for it.” UK (police.uk)
Ensuring quick wins are consolidated and built on as part of a long-term open data strategy is 
one of the recommendations reached in Part 1 of this paper. This consolidation of quick wins 
can help win support, scale-up activities and advance permanent organisational change.
20
Occasionally,  however,  the  deeper  cultural  change  aspects  are  overlooked  in  the  course  of  
pursuing quick wins or following the black-letter law. Failing to deal with cultural change can 
compromise the overall quality and sustainability of the open data initiative in the long-term.
All of the initiatives surveyed are still in the emergent phase, and grappling with how to begin to 
embed long-term sustainable open data practice. As a result, there is no consensus regarding 
the most effective way of consolidating change. The literature, however, does offer some 
recommendations regarding capacity building and offering incentives and rewards to staff 
based on innovation and impact. These could be topics for further exploration as open data 
intitatives evolve. 
Learning from success stories
An ongoing challenge when seeking to consolidate change and scale up an initiative can be to 
spread understanding and support to diverse ministries and institutions. The literature suggests 
that linking to stories of impact and success is an important part of longer-term consolidation of 
change efforts.
21
 Stories of impact and success can flow from fostering ongoing communication 
with the reuse community and other areas of government.
20 Colville, I. et al (1993) Developing and understanding cultural change in HM Customs and Excise, Public Administration, 
71(4) pp.549 - 565. Colville, I. et al (1993) found that a series of small, continuing efforts at making improvements within HM 
Customs & Excise was an effective at focusing attention on the need to solve bigger problems.
21 Kotter, J.P. (1996) Leading change, Harvard Business School Press.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201530
In Macedonia, for example, the aim is to develop 10-15 applications to showcase and sell 
the value of open data to other institutions. Realising there is a gap currently, Macedonia is 
collaborating with the World Bank to develop a formula to help estimate open data impact for 
different institutions and sectors. Collecting real-life examples of the impacts of open data 
continues to be a challenge. 
“There need to be real use-cases and actual examples: how there was an NGO or a company 
that was able to access data, build a service on top of it and make money out of it. We are 
missing real, simple examples of good use cases.” Estonia
Both interviewees and the literature suggest that in linking to stories of impact and success, 
it is important to make a contextualised business case (“institution by institution”), and make 
it often. This business case should be adapted for each different department or institution so 
it makes sense in terms of their overall vision, capacity and existing business processes. The 
open data story will be different for each country and public sector culture.
Recommendation: Seek out and foster stories of the impact of open data to help illustrate its 
value for government implementers. Adjust your impact narrative or ‘business case’ for different 
departments, so it makes sense in terms of their overall vision, capacity and existing processes. 
Maintaining the political will to support open data
During the consolidation phase, one barrier faced by many countries is sustaining the political 
will to keep open data a priority. Some authors suggest taking advantage of new election 
mandates, external influences and pressure and citizen or user demand.
22
 Our interviews suggest 
having a political window is important not just during launch of an open data initiative, but also 
to continuing the change programme. Estonia, Chile, South Korea, Macedonia and the UK all 
reported that the Open Government Partnership has been a helpful tool for holding the focus 
on open data. 
That said, international commitments alone may not be sufficient to lock in change. While Kenya 
is a part of the Open Government Partnership, political interest in open data at the national 
level is currently waning. Following national elections and a change of administration, the open 
data community has had to start again to win over the new government and entrench more 
internal capacity for open data capacity. 
22 Abramson, M., Lawrence, P.  (2001) The Challenge of transforming organisations: lessons learned about revitalising 
organisations, Rowman & Littlefield

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201531
Tapping  into  external  sources  of  support  from  within  civil  society,  media  and  the  business  
community to maintain momentum and political will is another tactic suggested by the literature.
23
 
Some countries that were interviewed seemed to be having more success with this approach 
than others (e.g. Chile and the UK). In Chile, for example, they are reaching out to civil society 
and regional governments to create enthusiasm for scaling-up open data efforts, through 
hosting an open data regional meeting attracting 800 participants and hackathons with civil 
society organisation partners. This approach may not work for every country. Chile, for instance, 
has a strong civil society with a long history of working on transparency and accountability. 
Countries without such an established open data community, high internet connectivity, or a 
history of state-civil society engagement on transparency would potentially find it more difficult.
Building political will and tapping into external support may be important, but not sufficient, 
to institutionalise open data change. It requires proactive, as opposed to reactive, supply of 
open government data. As one interviewee from Estonia put it:
“The most important part is that it’s a law now, so you have to have a very good excuse if 
you haven’t put the data up there. The problem in Estonia is that the market doesn’t try 
our open data initiatives, so there is no market demand for open data. We treat this as a 
problem, we understand that not all of the roads in Estonia are widely used, but we need 
roads everywhere. Open data is the same, even though it’s not widely used. It has to be 
there, because you never know when somebody wants to use that data [...] We don’t have 
a problem with technical knowledge – there’s no question of technical capacity. But if there 
is no market demand then [civil servants] start asking why [open data is] needed.” Estonia
Recommendation: Foster external support within industry, civil society and academia to 
drive continued demand for open data. External support can help to maintain political will 
to invest in open data and be a source of ongoing learning and dialogue.
Encouraging ongoing learning
The literature on cultural change emphasises readiness to reflect, admit mistakes and make 
changes quickly. This goes hand-in-hand with ongoing monitoring of progress against success 
metrics to evaluate errors. Several interviewees also emphasised the importance of “learning 
by doing”, and being prepared to admit mistakes and adapt plans as necessary. As one official 
from the UK explained:
23 Cabinet Office (2012) Open Data: Unleashing the potential, Cabinet Office

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201532
“I suppose you just learn as you go along about what goes well and what doesn’t go well. 
As opposed to having a plan that you can adapt and amend, you just get a sense of what 
works.” UK (Cabinet Office) 
Another strong theme emerging from the interviews is the importance of reflection throughout 
the process of design and implementation. In the race to launch open data portals when trying 
to secure a quick win, or in the face of strong external pressure (as discussed in Part 2), often 
not enough time or consideration is put into learning or capacity building around open data. 
Realising that a lack of basic understanding of open data potentially slows down progress, 
several  countries  are  now  reverse-engineering  organisational  learning  programmes  for  civil  
servants. 
Various approaches to ongoing learning are being explored within the countries surveyed. 
These include hosting regular presentations and workshops with institutions implementing open 
data, journalists, NGOs and university ICT or innovation departments to share experiences and 
challenges of working with open data. Along with employing the similar idea of a data literacy 
camp, the Kenyan Government is also employing a more direct approach, talking through 
concerns over open data amongst government officials and offering reassurances.
Recommendation:  Introduce  opportunities  for  civil  servants  to  take  part  in  ongoing  
learning about open data. This could be through open data training, secondments to ‘best 
practice’ teams working with open data or regular workshops. This will help you continue to 
improve and expand the reach of your open data initiative. 
Evaluating open data outcomes
A key departure from the literature in countries surveyed is the lack of focus on monitoring 
and evaluation. Given the relatively early stage of most open data initiatives surveyed, we 
encountered few references to how leaders are monitoring and measuring their success. This 
could be a reflection of how the open data initiative was launched. As was the case in Kenya 
and Chile, open data initiatives are often launched rapidly in response to top-down pressure, 
without time to develop a detailed strategy for implementation that include defined success 
metrics, and a plan for monitoring and evaluation. In other cases, open data initiatives unfold 
in an organic or opportunistic fashion. In these situations, little attention is sometimes paid at 
the design stage to defining metrics to measure wider cultural change.
The Open Data Research Network is beginning to think more about defining metrics to measure 
progress and evaluate initiatives, both in terms of cultural change and external impacts on 

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201533
society.
24
 More work needs to be done in terms of action learning and evaluation of open data 
initiatives – including organisational aspects – to understand how change happens. It is too 
early to say whether using ‘blunt levers’ such as introducing domestic legislation will have a 
trickle-down effect on organisational cultural change. Qualitative research such as surveying 
civil servants, for example, could help to track how attitudes and behaviour evolve over time 
in response to open data.
Recommendation: Build in metrics to regularly evaluate your open data activities. This 
will help you to measure progress, benchmark success and identify areas for improvement. 
Conclusion
Government open data initiatives – whether cross-departmental or within a department – will 
only work well if the government can transition easily to publishing and using open data. 
Integrating  organisational  change  management  into  an  initiative  from  the  outset  can  help  
embed a sustainable open data culture. It can also help to maximise the potential impacts of 
open data for economic growth, improved policy-making and social and environmental benefit. 
The public sector is large, and open data is generally cross-departmental, coordinated by one 
central agency, with a high degree of IT involvement. This means that government transition 
to using and producing open data will not be an incremental, step-by-step process, but more 
multifaceted. 
The interrelated recommendations set out in this paper could be therefore be applied in different 
combinations and at different times to help bring about lasting change. These range from 
articulating a vision for how open data can solve problems, finding quick wins and securing 
high-level support to engaging grassroots champions, encouraging feedback and being flexible 
and responsive to the needs of different departments. 
This paper is the starting point for a deeper exploration of how change happens in government 
to support open data. Over the next 12-18 months, we will look to build on the themes and 
scope of this paper, through the forthcoming International Leaders Network and other global 
forums.
 
There  are  still  areas  to  be  further  explored  around  organisational  change  management  to  
24 See www.opendataresearch.org for details of research projects on these topics.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201534
support open data. For example, making sure that hiring and organisational structure practices 
and policies do not stop change from happening was one of the 10 common principles for 
change management derived from the literature, but was not raised in any of the interviews. 
This could be perhaps because this aspect of change management has not been acted on, or 
because the open data initiatives are still too relatively new.  As a result, no recommendations 
on human resources and organisational structure are made in this paper.
 
The next edition of this paper might also explore in greater detail how organisational change 
guidance might differ for a central agency coordinating open data policy across government, 
as compared with a headline initiative from an individual department. The ODI will continue to 
explore ways to build on this first paper.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201535
About the Open Data Institute and the Partnership for Open Data
This paper is part of a series produced by the Open Data Institute, as part of the Partnership 
for Open Data (POD), funded by the World Bank.
What is open data?
Open  data  is  data  that  is  made  available  by  governments,  businesses  and  individuals  for  
anyone to access, use and share. 
What is the Open Data Institute?
The Open Data Institute (ODI) is an independent, non-profit and non-partisan company based in 
London, UK. The ODI convenes world-class experts from industry, government and academia 
to collaborate, incubate, nurture and explore new ideas to promote innovation with open data. 
It was founded by Sir Tim Berners-Lee and Professor Sir Nigel Shadbolt and offers training, 
membership, research and strategic advice for organisations looking to explore the possibilities 
of open data.
In its first two years, the ODI has helped to unlock over US$55m in value through the application 
of open data. With 24 nodes around the world, the ODI has trained more than 500 people 
from over 25 countries. In 2014, the ODI trained officials from countries including Botswana, 
Burkina Faso, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, Moldova, Kyrgyzstan and the UK on the publication 
and use of open data. 
What is the Partnership for Open Data?
The Open Data Institute has joined Open Knowledge and the World Bank in the Partnership 
for Open Data (POD), a programme designed to help policy-makers and citizens in developing 
countries to understand and exploit the benefits of open data. The partnership aims to: support 
developing countries to plan, execute and run open data initiatives; increase reuse of open 
data in developing countries; and grow the base of evidence on the impact of open data for 
development. The initial funding comes from The World Bank’s Development Grant Facility 
(WB DGF).
25
Under POD, the ODI has carried out open data readiness assessments, strategic advice, 
25 Partnership for Open Data website: http://theodi.org/odp4d

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201536
training and technical assistance for low- and middle-income countries across four continents. 
In 2015, POD will merge with the Open Data for Development (OD4D) network. As part of this 
new, larger network, the ODI will continue to take a lead in supporting the world’s government 
leaders in implementing open data, and in doing so will continue to publish practical guides 
and learning materials such as this series of reports.
What do you think?
The  ODI  will  continue  to  explore  ways  to  build  on  this  paper,  and  encourages  feedback  and  
comments from the open data and global development communities. Get in touch with fiona.
smith@theodi.org to share your thoughts.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201537
Appendix 1
The ‘10 principles for change management were identified through a synthesis of literature 
on organisational change management. They provide a starting point for examining change 
management in the context of open data. Based on these principles and interviews with 
government officials in seven countries, we came up with our own recommendations for 
managing organisational change to support open data. The common principles were:
1. Build agreement for change
The literature review seeks to secure broad agreement on the need to change from the status 
quo position, which Kelman refers to as building a “constituency for change.”
26
 Preparing 
the organisation to embrace change also involves anticipating potential barriers, such as a 
lack of will. It may also be important to develop compelling messaging to mitigate resistance.
2. Develop a shared vision and strategy
Articulate a vision that aligns with the original values and ethos of the organisation (such as 
delivering effective services), and communicate the vision frequently using different mediums. 
A clear vision provides the anchor for a long-term strategy, which should ideally include 
specific policy-oriented goals, and incorporate cultural, technical, economic, social, legal, 
institutional and implementation aspects. Where possible, there should be opportunities for 
civil service staff to participate in the strategy development process to enhance ownership 
and support for the transformation initiative.
3. Get a change team together to guide the change process 
A change team needs diverse representation from across the agency, including respected 
long-time civil servants (‘insiders’) to ensure broad buy-in, solicit feedback, identify issues 
requiring most urgent attention, and participate in design/re-design activities. Along with an 
internal change team, convening an external advisory group or seeking ongoing stakeholder 
engagement – with civil society, the ICT and business communities – may also help to inform 
design and ensure relevance to society’s needs. 
4. Combine top-down and bottom-up leadership styles 
Strong leadership and commitment from top levels of management is needed to drive the 
26 Kelman, S. (2005) Unleashing change: A study of organisational renewal in government, Brookings Institution Press

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201538
vision, and set the change process in motion. Top-down leadership should be combined 
with  an  emergent  style  which  harnesses  bottom-up  knowledge  and  expertise,  and  taps  
into ‘pro-change’ forces. 
5. Make change sustainable, and find quick wins
To sustain support for the transformation, plan for tangible results that can be achieved quickly 
and early. Demonstrate the benefits of open data through pilot projects, phased roll-out, or 
learning exchanges between city councils and local government branches.
6. Human resources and structure are enablers, not barriers, for supporting transformation
Modify structures, policies and incentives regarding hiring, job titles, rewards and skill sets 
to align with the needs of open data. Provide incentives for behavioural change and reward 
employees based on expertise, leadership, increased responsibility, their contribution to the 
mission and innovation. To increase motivation, give staff explicit permission to innovate, and 
empower individual agencies to develop and test their own solutions.
7. Maintain open communication and trust
Create an environment which supports two-way communication (via internal and external 
channels), so that critics and supporters have equal voice. Provide ongoing opportunities for 
participation and consultation so that employees understand the objectives of the initiative, 
and can make a serious contribution to the programme.
8. Become a ‘learning organisation’
Collect data to track the progress and commitment to change within the public sector 
agency. Evaluate activities and programmes for continuous learning (“learning by doing”), 
and demonstrate a readiness to admit mistakes, including making admissions to the public. 
Iterate and make changes quickly (“fail fast, fail cheaply”), while continually reviewing success 
metrics for relevancy. 
9. Be agile and responsive
Embrace experimentation and innovation through rapid design and piloting before scaling-up 
(especially where new technology is involved). Place ‘data users’ at the core of any project 
design to ensure what is delivered meets their needs. Adjust project design and transition 
plans based on regular user-testing and reviews.
10. Monitor long-term change
Crowdsource stories from frontline users in different contexts to inspire the vision for how this 
change can bring benefits – to service delivery, for example – to find new solutions. Depending 
on the context, tap into external sources of support, such as citizen or business demands, or 
“political windows”, to sustain enduring support beyond central government election cycles.

Open data in government: how to bring about change | Open Data Institute 201539