

 

 
 
 
Contents 
Contents1 
About2 
Introduction3 
Research3 
How do we define data access initiatives?4 
Diagram5 
How are data access initiatives designed?5 
Systems thinking5 
COM-B6 
Logic models6 
What did we learn from our exploratory research?7 
Discovery8 
A note on terminology9 
How are data initiatives understanding their data landscape?9 
What tools and methodologies exist to support data landscaping?10 
How are the results of data landscaping exercises published and shared?12 
How does data landscaping inform the design of initiatives?14 
How do existing tools help initiatives with aspects of data landscaping?14 
Data ecosystem mapping15 
Developing Logic Models15 
Applying the Data Ethics Canvas16 
Using the Open Standards for Data Guidebook17 
What did we learn from our discovery research?17 
Next Steps18 
Methodology20 
Research Methods20 
Known limitations and mitigations20 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
published in January 2021. Its lead author was Leigh Dodds with contributions from 
Elea Himmelsbach, Emily Sinclair, Flor Serale, James Maddison, Jeni Tennison, Josh 
D’Addario and Olivier Thereaux. If you want to share feedback by email or would like 
to get in touch, contact the ‘Infrastructure for common challenges’ project team at 
research@theodi.org.  
 
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click the 
‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     2 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 

 
 
Introduction 
 
Communities, societies and industries across the world face challenges. Some are at 
a global scale, such as the Covid-19 pandemic, while others are local such as 
municipal disaster response. Many of these challenges require, in part, better or more 
appropriate access to data. 
 
Data access initiatives​ are joint activities and programmes of work that address a 
specific challenge by improving (which may mean increasing or decreasing) access to 
data, and by building or strengthening ​data infrastructure​. 
 
As part of the Open Data Institute’s ‘​Data infrastructure for common challenges​’ 
project we have been exploring how these initiatives are developing the data 
infrastructure they need to tackle specific challenges. Our research so far has 
focused on the needs of those who are designing new data access initiatives. 
 
People leading data access initiatives need to understand the current data  
landscape to help them prioritise and plan the initial activities for their initiatives. This 
data landscaping work often requires a range of activities including stakeholder 
mapping and engagement, creating data inventories, and understanding user needs. 
 
Programmatic design tools such as data ecosystem mapping and logic models can 
help people leading data access initiatives to understand and address these 
challenges. Many initiatives use these tools, but do not fully exploit the opportunities 
they can offer. 
 
This report is a summary of our initial user needs research on data access initiatives. 
It reviews design tools and outlines how different data access initiatives have 
embedded them into their design. 
 
Our intention is to share insights into the challenges these initiatives encounter and 
how these tools can be useful to help them build the infrastructure they need to be 
successful. This report is not a set of recommendations, but represents our desire to 
‘work in the open’: to share the approach and what we have learned, summarise our 
research to date and, more importantly, to collect external feedback on our insights 
and approach. 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     3 

 
 
Exploring data access 
initiatives 
The project began with an initial exploratory research phase which we used to 
develop a broader understanding of the scope and activities of a range of existing 
data access initiatives. 
 
Our goal for this phase was to develop familiarity with a wide range of initiatives and 
identify a focus for further work.  
 
Within this phase, we: 
 
●explored the concept of data access initiatives​ to refine our understanding 
of the term and consider its relationships to data infrastructure, data 
ecosystems and data institutions. This helped to situate this project in the 
wider context of the kinds of interventions policymakers and others are 
making around data 
●identified and researched a range of data access initiatives​ that conform 
to our definition, with a particular focus on those in the health sector and 
working around climate action. This helped us to understand the range of 
activities that initiatives were undertaking and how they described their work. 
●interviewed users from individual initiatives​ to learn more about how they 
have scoped, planned and delivered their work. This helped us to understand 
the issues that initiatives face and where additional support and guidance 
might be useful 
●researched and explored a range of frameworks for designing 
programmes​, to identify how they might be used to frame the activities and 
work required to address common challenges. 
 
We summarise some of these activities in the following sections. 
How do we define data access initiatives? 
As part of our work exploring data infrastructure for common challenges, we have 
been using the term ‘data access initiatives’. We define a data access initiative as ​a 
collaborative programme that focuses on collecting, using and sharing data to 
address a social, environmental or economic challenge​. 
 
To differentiate these from other projects and initiatives, we characterise data access 
initiatives as: 
 
●Initiatives or programmes that have ​a clear challenge​, in the form of a 
specific social, environmental or economic problem that is the focus for the 
collaboration 
●Involve​ multiple stakeholders​ that are actively working together to solve the 
problem 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     4 

 
 
●Include a strong​ focus on collecting, using and sharing data​ as part of 
their work. 
 
There are many types of alliances and partnerships that collect, use or share data but 
aren’t tackling a specific problem: professional networks or data sharing platforms, 
for example. 
 
There are also challenge-led initiatives in which data – or information flows – is not a 
strong element of tackling the challenge. All initiatives will need information to help 
understand a problem or to measure progress against its objectives. But using data 
for monitoring and understanding a challenge isn’t the same as using data to tackle 
the challenge. Sometimes other interventions such as building skills, understanding 
or reallocating resources may be the best option. 
 
We have chosen to focus on data access initiatives involving multiple stakeholders. 
The challenges they address tend to be more complex and have a higher impact, and 
sharing and publishing data is of particular importance when there is a need for 
cross-organisational collaboration. 
 
Our initial review highlighted that data access initiatives are engaged in a range of 
activities relating to build or maintaining data infrastructure, including: 
 
●creating ​new data assets​ that will enable others to build understanding and 
tools to tackle the problem, 
●developing ​open standards​ to support collecting, using and sharing data, 
●creating ​guidance and policies​ that will help to inform how that data is used, 
in support of tackling a specific problem while minimising potential harms, 
●building ​new technologies​, including platforms, code and algorithms that 
will help support the management and use of the data. 
 
Over time, to embed and secure the change necessary to solve a challenge, these 
initiatives might lead to new ​data institutions​ – organisations that steward data for a 
social, environmental or economic goal – or a strengthened role for existing 
institutions. 
 
The sketch below maps how an initiative might evolve into a data institution and lead 
to wider change. The flow is illustrative only; in practice we have seen multiple 
approaches in this area. 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     5 

 
 
Sketch 
 
 
What frameworks can help design data access 
initiatives? 
Data access initiatives engage in a range of activities with the goal of tackling a 
specific social, environmental or economic challenge.  
 
To help understand how these activities might be planned, we looked at several 
different frameworks that are intended to support the design of impactful 
programmes of work. Our goals were to: 
 
●understand how tackling a specific problem or challenge might be 
decomposed 
●identify frameworks that might help to inform the design of new programmes 
●understand whether these frameworks could help support analysis of 
different data access initiatives 
 
We explored three frameworks: systems thinking, the COM-B behaviour change 
model and logic models. 
Systems thinking 
The ‘​systems thinking​’ methodology encourages us to think about the world as a 
complex, interconnected system. By understanding the different parts of a system, 
and how they interact, we can better understand how the system as a whole might 
be changed. At their core, data access initiatives are about changing or intervening in 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     6 

 
 
systems.  
 
Researchers exploring systems thinking and its application to drive change have 
identified a range of interventions, many of which relate to building data 
infrastructure. 
 
Donella H. Meadows identified ​12 leverage points that can be used to change 
systems​. One of those levers involves changing how data and information are shared, 
to provide better insights that can improve how systems work. 
 
Les Robinson has developed Meadows’ 12 points into a checklist of 18 ways to 
change a system (see the graphic ‘How to change a system’ below). Several of these 
are relevant to the design of data-access initiatives: 
 
●Infrastructure​ – building or improving infrastructure, products and processes 
that make it simpler and easier to achieve the desired outcome 
●Creating feedback loops​ and accountability to collect data on the 
consequences of behaviour and decisions and feed it back into the system 
●Building inclusion and community​ to encourage more equitable access to 
data, share best practices, and encourage engagement with those who are 
affected by the collection and use of data 
●Improving or building ​data institutions​ to help to build strong governance 
and rules 
●Encouraging innovation​ to look for better alternatives and outcomes. 
 
 
 
Image credit ©Les Robinson 2019 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     7 

 
 
We found systems thinking a helpful way to think about the design of existing and 
new data access initiatives. It highlights the importance of a range of different types 
of intervention. Understanding the levers available to change systems can help to 
plan and prioritise impactful programmes. 
 
 
Models of behaviour change and COM-B  
Data access initiatives often require individuals and organisations to change their 
behaviour. This might involve sharing more data or changing business processes to 
be more data-enabled. 
 
The ​COM-B model​ describes three major influences on behaviour:  
 
●Capability​. An individual or system’s physical and psychological skills, 
knowledge and ability to act in a certain way. 
●Opportunity​. External factors which enable or inhibit certain behaviours. 
Influences include physical opportunities, such as time, location and 
resources, as well as social opportunities such as cultural norms and 
accepted behaviours. 
●Motivation​. Internal processes that influence behaviour. These consist of 
automatic processes, such as desire or aversion, and reflective processes, 
based on our evaluation of past events. 
 
 
Susan Michie, Maartje M van Stralen, Robert West. (2011). The behaviour change wheel: A new method for 
characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     8 
Read more​:  
Can thinking about the world as a complex, interconnected system help us 
solve difficult problems? 

 
 
A data access initiative can be designed to address one or more of them through 
delivering interventions. The ‘​Behaviour change wheel​’ – a commonly-adopted 
framework which builds on the COM-B model – describes nine key interventions that 
an initiative might deliver to change influences on behaviour, which we can see 
applying to data access initiatives:  
 
●Education or training ​– improving knowledge and skills around data can 
improve capacity in a sector or industry, and improve people’s motivation  
●Persuasion, incentivisation or coercion ​– providing incentives, such as 
prize money or work contracts, or introducing an element of punishment, are 
changes in motivation. The way that those incentives are communicated to 
ecosystem actors is key 
●Enablement ​– providing resources, such as seed funding or skilled data 
professionals on fellowships, for organisations in an ecosystem can improve 
available opportunities, but also improve motivation and capability  
●Modelling ​– providing relatable examples of other data access initiatives can 
improve motivation  
●Environmental restructuring​ –​ ​delivering structural changes at an 
organisational or ecosystem level can create more opportunities for change 
●Restrictions​ – introducing rules and guidance about the collection, 
dissemination and use of data into an industry or sector can motivate actors 
to engage with a desired behaviour or steer clear of undesirable actions 
 
These interventions can be enabled through policy categories such as service 
provision, regulation or legislation, communications and marketing, fiscal measures, 
guidelines or social and environmental planning.  
 
At the ODI we have previously applied thinking from the COM-B model to designing 
some of our own programmes of work. It can be helpful in planning out a range of 
activities that will ultimately influence the behaviour of the broader ecosystem in 
which the initiative is operating. 
 
 
 
Logic models 
Logic models​ are tools designed to help people plan impactful projects and 
communicate those plans to others.  
 
They provide a structured way of thinking about how to build a programme that will 
help to address a specific problem or challenge – essential for designing a good data 
access initiative. Logic modelling consists of mapping out the logical flow from the 
inputs and activities that an initiative requires, to the outputs needed in order to 
enable the outcomes and impact the initiative is set up to achieve. 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     9 
Read more​:  
Changing behaviour to solve challenges 

 
 
 
 
W.K Kellogg Foundation Evaluation Handbook (1998) 
 
 
Logic models are widely used to help to design programmes of work. However they 
can be applied in a variety of contexts. At the ODI, we have often applied logic 
models to our own programmes and projects, including ​OpenActive​ – a 
community-led initiative to help people get active using open data. Our activities have 
included things like developing open standards to support publication of open data. 
Those activities have produced outputs such as openly licensed standards and 
specifications, and lead to outcomes such as ​up to £3 million per year in health costs 
avoided and up to a £20 million per year increase in productivity​. Ultimately, the 
intended impact is to address the problem of inactivity in England by helping people 
get active. 
 
Of the three frameworks, we found logic models to be particularly useful as they 
provided an overall design framework for describing how the activities of an initiative 
were intended to contribute towards its desired outcomes and impact. The other 
frameworks were helpful in supplying a menu of possible interventions that might be 
more or less appropriate for a given problem or context, that are then included in a 
logic model. 
 
In our discovery phase we tested this tool further with some real world data access 
initiatives. This is described in ​Developing logic models​ below. 
 
We also used logic models as an analytical tool. Based on our desk research we 
created simple logic models for a small number of data access initiatives, identifying 
their outputs and activities. This approach allowed us to identify a set of common 
activities relating to the building and maintenance of data infrastructure. 
 
We used this list of activities to identify and compare a set of data access initiatives 
that are building data infrastructure based on adoption of common standards to 
support decentralised publishing of data. We have defined data access initiatives that 
follow this pattern as ‘​decentralised data publishing initiatives​’. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     10 
Read more​:  
Using logic models to design data access initiatives 
Comparing decentralised data publishing initiatives 

 
 
What did we learn from our exploratory research? 
The research phase helped to develop our understanding of the field, built 
connections with a broad range of different initiatives that will be useful in our later 
work, and identified a range of challenges that initiatives are facing when planning 
and prioritising their work. 
 
The interplay between initiatives, data infrastructure and data institutions is complex. 
Understanding the pathways for how initiatives develop into data institutions merits 
further research but is outside the scope of this project. 
 
From our research and interviews with initiatives we learned that: 
 
●Frequently, while initiatives have a broad vision, they focus on identifying 
a narrower set of use cases or problem statements to tackle within their 
early activities. 
●Individuals driving initiatives typically have strong domain knowledge, 
but may lack experience scoping and designing the initiative, planning 
how to create or improve data infrastructure, and with how to select, 
develop and drive adoption of standards for data. 
●Understanding the current data ecosystem and infrastructure is 
important for prioritising use cases, identifying the necessary activities 
required to build the desired future state, and demonstrating the value of 
their approach. 
●Few initiatives seemed to be explicitly applying frameworks like COM-B, 
systems thinking and logic models to guide their design, although the 
core ideas were present in a number of plans and strategies. 
●Often initiatives lack tools to understand and describe existing data 
infrastructure and choosing which interventions would be useful to help 
them tackle a challenge. 
●Often initiatives lack guidance to ensure that data infrastructure is 
designed and built in ways that not only achieve their goals, but also 
maximise diversity, equity and inclusion, and minimise any potential 
harmful impacts from the initiative. 
●Data access initiatives approach monitoring, evaluation and learning in 
different ways, often depending on their funding model. Those with rigid 
government funding have a rigorous evaluation framework, while 
startups and corporate programmes have a variety of key performance 
indicators. 
 
These insights identify a number of different needs amongst those leading initiatives: 
 
●a need to better understand the role of open standards​ in achieving their 
goals and how to go about creating them. The ODI’s existing ​guidebook on 
open standards​ is designed to help with this 
 
●a need for external review and validation of plans and activities​ to ensure 
they are well designed and executed. This might be met through developing 
further guidance and support for applying tools like logic models, or by 
developing templated models for certain types of outputs or activities, for 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     11 

 
 
example ‘creating a data inventory’ 
 
●a need to undertake a review of the existing data ecosystem, datasets 
and data infrastructure​ to help prioritise activities.  
 
Of these three needs, we decided to explore the final one in more detail. 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     12 

 
 
Data landscaping for 
initiatives 
Different types of stakeholders involved in data access initiatives face different 
challenges during their design. 
 
●Those ​funding data access initiatives​ may need more insight into what 
support initiatives need, help in identifying well-designed initiatives that are 
likely to create impact, or help supporting those who are designing and 
leading initiatives so they are more likely to create impact in practice. 
●Those ​designing new data access initiatives​ may need help in designing 
an impactful initiative. 
●Those ​leading existing initiatives​ may need to evaluate or adapt they way 
they are approaching their work 
 
We have focused on those who are designing new data access initiatives. This group 
includes policy makers who are looking to scope new sector-wide initiatives and 
individuals who are trying to set up new initiatives. 
 
We believe this group needs the most help and support. Identifying the needs of this 
group during their early planning and prioritisation will also lead to potentially greater 
impact. 
 
We framed our problem statement as: 
 
People leading data access initiatives need to understand the current data 
landscape to help them prioritise and plan the initial activities for their 
initiatives. These plans are frequently a subset of the wider challenge which 
they are seeking to address. This data landscaping work often requires a 
range of activities including stakeholder mapping and engagement, creating 
data inventories, understanding user needs, etc. 
 
What help do they need to carry out these activities? 
 
To help answer this question, we explored in more detail: 
 
●how initiatives went about understanding their ‘data landscape’ or 
‘ecosystem’, so we can understand the activities involved in that process 
●which actors, skills and resources were involved in those processes 
●what tools and methodologies already exist, had not been used by the 
initiatives we studied, and might support other initiatives in this process 
●the types of outputs produced by those exercises and tools 
●how these outputs could have usefully informed the plans and activities of 
the initiative 
 
We used a variety of methods. 
 
●Desk research ​where we looked at data ecosystem mapping and similar 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     13 

 
 
approaches to understanding the wider context of initiatives, as well as the 
design of these approaches and terminology that is used to describe them. 
●User research​ where we conducted interviews and a small survey to 
understand how individual organisations approach activities such as 
ecosystem mapping and data landscaping  
●Testing some existing ODI tools​ with some existing initiatives to 
understand how those tools might support the design and planning of new 
data access initiatives. 
A note on terminology 
For the purposes of this report we are using the phrase “​data landscaping​” to refer 
to a broad range of activities that support a data access initiative in understanding 
the context in which they operate.  
 
The context for a data landscaping exercise might be a specific market, sector, or 
community, as defined by the goals of the initiative. As we note in the following 
section, the activities involved in “data landscaping” vary across initiatives. 
 
In future outputs from this project we may refine this definition further and clarify the 
typical activities involved in the process. 
How are data initiatives understanding their data 
landscape? 
Our research showed that data landscaping exercises involve a variety of different 
activities: 
 
●Stakeholder mapping​, to understand the people and organisations that an 
initiative might engage with, support, collaborate with, or influence. 
●Creating ​data inventories​ to understand what data is currently collected, 
shared or managed that is relevant to the initiative. 
●Doing ​user research​ to understand the needs of data users, data stewards 
and decision makers that might be supported by the initiative. 
●Carrying out ​needs assessments​ with stakeholders to understand their skills 
and areas of support. 
●Mapping existing data ecosystems​ to understand how data is currently 
being accessed, used and shared. 
●Mapping future data ecosystems​ to help articulate the vision and potential 
areas of activity for the initiative and identify potential risks or unintended 
consequences. 
●Gathering and developing ​use cases and requirements​ to inform plans for 
building and strengthening data infrastructure. 
●Doing ​market analysis​ to understand the needs of data users, or 
opportunities for future products and services that will further the needs of 
the initiative. 
●Performing ​gap analyses​ to identify where additional data may be needed to 
tackle a problem, or where existing data infrastructure might be improved. 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     14 

 
 
●Understanding the legal and regulatory context​ within which the initiative 
operates. 
 
These activities are carried out by data access initiatives using a variety of 
approaches, including conducting surveys, running structured interviews, holding 
informal meetings, carrying out desk research and facilitating workshops.  
 
The activities are often done iteratively, with detail being refined based on learning or 
insights from other activities. For example, mapping out stakeholders might identify 
further potential sources of data to refine the contents of a data inventory. 
 
However having a clear idea of the scope for a landscaping exercise is essential in 
order to narrow down the range of research, engagement and cataloguing work that 
might be required. Developing use cases and ensuring the initiative is properly 
scoped are important first steps. 
 
In most cases we investigated, these activities were designed to engage with 
stakeholders and to work in the open. However the depth of stakeholder engagement 
varied from project to project.  
 
We observed that the skills and experiences of people leading initiatives can have a 
direct impact on how they approach the data landscaping exercises. Many data 
access initiatives that we interviewed were led by individuals with a specialist or 
technical background. More technically minded leaders and teams focused more on 
mapping technical infrastructure and less on other areas, such as mapping 
stakeholders. 
 
We also noted that data landscaping activities tend to focus on mapping existing 
relationships and assessing stakeholder demands but did not often extend to 
exploring and mapping the potential or desired future state of the ecosystem. 
What tools and methodologies exist to support 
data landscaping? 
A number of existing tools, expressing a range of methodologies, have been 
published to help data access initiatives undertake data landscaping exercises. ​Table 
1 in the Appendix​ summarises some of these tools, their intended use, the people 
involved in their use, and the types of outputs they produce. 
 
We compared the listed tools according to their intended purpose, the scope of the 
activities they cover, the outputs produced and the intended audience.  
Purpose of the tools 
All these tools are designed to engage with and understand an ecosystem and 
increase access to sector specific data.  
 
We also observed a set of shared activities between these tools related to data 
landscaping: 
 
●Identification of problems and how data can help to address them 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     15 

 
 
●Implementation risks and barriers for data publishing 
●Identification of data governance and stakeholders  
●Supply and demand gap assessments 
●Recommendations and guidelines for data publication 
 
Some of these tools were designed for important specific purposes that aim to 
address power imbalances, such as enabling data interoperability and increasing 
data quality in the Global South, or breaking barriers between data hoarders and 
publishers to increase the use of data and enhance development outcomes. 
 
Depending on the main intended outcome of a tool (increase data quality, open 
public sector data, create an inventory, develop a standard, etc.) some outputs are 
designed to support data access initiatives in their landscaping exercises. These 
outputs include toolkits, step-by-step guides, canvases and assessment reports. 
Multi-stakeholder approach 
Many of the tools listed are community-oriented and often their users consist of 
self-selected groups, including public sector, academy and civil society. Their main 
audience and intended users predominantly includes stakeholders that are already 
involved in the problem space. Opportunities to involve other communities and 
actors, such as private sector players, to contribute to data landscaping activities are 
relatively limited.  
Ecosystem engagement 
We discovered that ecosystem engagement and stakeholder analysis are activities 
that are shared by many of the listed tools. However the language and purpose of the 
activity varies significantly from tool to tool. Data ecosystem terminology used to 
describe those activities can include: 
 
●ecosystem mapping 
●demand analysis 
●stakeholder assessment 
●data governance 
●community building  
●user analysis 
●thematic expert engagement/networks 
●stakeholder interviews 
 
We also observed that activities to engage with stakeholders as part of the landscape 
assessment include a range of activities including: 
 
●interviews with technical experts to build a diverse community around a 
specific problem 
●desk research to identify actors 
●workshops with the public sector and civil society 
●canvas/questionnaire to identify stakeholder ́s demands and needs 
●data asset inventory (mapping datasets and institutions in charge of 
publishing) 
●ecosystem mapping and comparison (ideal versus actual). 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     16 

 
 
How do existing tools help initiatives with aspects 
of data landscaping? 
We tested some existing tools to understand how they might support several 
early-stage data access initiatives in planning their activities. We chose data 
landscaping tools we were more familiar with and that fitted the user needs we 
identified for the various initiatives. This was done to be more relevant to the needs of 
the initiative. It also meant we were evaluating tools that we could then alter and 
adapt. 
 
For each tool we ran workshops, provided additional guidance where needed and 
solicited feedback from the initiatives. This has helped us to better understand how 
people might, realistically, use them in the development of their initiatives. 
Data ecosystem mapping 
Data ecosystem mapping​ is designed to clarify how data creates value, illustrate the 
different actors in a data ecosystem, and show how value is exchanged across it.  
 
We facilitated data ecosystem mapping workshops to help nine different 
organisations to scope their data access initiatives. 
 
In the workshops we asked each organisation to: 
 
●map the data they accessed, used and shared 
●identify the data needed to build services 
●identify the partners needed to deliver those services 
●discuss findings with the group to find new opportunities. 
 
User testing feedback identified ecosystem mapping as a productive tool to build a 
use case to engage stakeholders and build support. We learned that the most 
productive maps were those that had a clear focus, such as mapping a particular use 
case. We also learned that ecosystem mapping is a useful tool to find new 
opportunities, such as new partnerships, data sources or service provision, but that 
this is often overlooked and should be emphasised in workshops. 
 
We found that, while not the same as in-person, an online workshop could still be a 
very effective way for people to engage with their data problem. Feedback from user 
testing explicitly highlighted that collaborating with other initiatives during the 
workshop was a valuable learning experience.  
 
Overall, mapping participant data ecosystems helped:  
 
●explore the variety of ways in which participants add and create value 
●clarify the roles and responsibilities to deliver the use case 
●identify ways to improve the initial idea of the initiative  
Developing logic models 
Logic models are designed as a framework to plan a path to impact. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     17 

 
 
Through workshops we tested how developing logic models can help early-stage 
initiatives structure their key activities, in order to achieve the desired impact for their 
data ecosystem. 
 
User testing feedback indicated that the logic model process reflected the approach 
that organisations often have to present in order to gain funding from donors or 
investors. Users particularly liked the idea of having a clear, visual representation of 
their path to impact and felt that this would be useful to underpin conversations with 
internal and external stakeholders. In this way logic models can both structure an 
initiative internally, and be used to engage with funders and other stakeholders 
externally. 
 
However, while most users felt that logic models could add value to their own 
projects, it was felt that in more exploratory projects, where the intended impact has 
not yet been established, the use of logic models might be a step ahead of the 
project.  
 
Overall, developing logic models helped:  
 
●structure the overall initiative clearly for use within the initiative 
●provide a clear visualisation of the path from activities to impact 
●support communication of the initiative with external stakeholders such as 
funders and partners. 
Data Ethics​ Canvas and Consequence Scanning 
The ​Data Ethics Canvas​ and ​Consequence Scanning​ are tools which help identify 
and manage ethical issues at any stage in a data project by asking questions about 
the use of data in the project.  
 
We tested how these two tools can complement each. We used the Data Ethics 
Canvas to help an organisation identify the ethical implications of implementing 
their initiative and used Consequence Scanning to help them to think about ways 
to mitigate any potential harms. 
 
User testing feedback indicated that the data ethics workshop helped illuminate 
difficulties in reducing harm while identifying and delivering positive interventions to 
people in vulnerable circumstances like fuel poverty. Users responded particularly 
positively to the way the workshop helped reveal blind spots around engagement 
and process such as how to engage with vulnerable consumers. They also liked its 
open and transparent process.  
 
Overall using the Data Ethics Canvas and Consequence Scanning tools helped:  
 
●illuminate issues and unintended consequences in a use case aimed at 
increasing access to data to provide services which could harm its target 
beneficiaries 
●highlight the importance of, and potential for, engagement with the 
ecosystem to reduce harm 
●inspire ways of having an open and transparent process in use-case 
development. 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     18 

 
 
Using the ‘​Open standards for data guidebook​’ 
Open standards for data are reusable agreements that make it easier for people 
and organisations to publish, access, share and use better quality data.  
 
To understand its contribution better, we interviewed an organisation who used the 
guidebook as their main reference to develop an open standard. Despite consulting 
the book extensively they did not make use of all the tools discussed in the book. 
We were able to advise them on the way that tools which are described in the 
guidebook, such as ​Data ecosystem mapping for open standards​, would help them 
develop their open standard.  
 
This indicates that the guidebook, while useful, may not be sufficient in guiding an 
organisation to develop an open standard, and that additional tools and expertise 
can be useful additions.  
 
Overall, using the ‘Open standards for data guidebook’ helped them:  
 
●understand how to get started in the creation of an open data standard 
●prioritise activities such as stakeholder mapping and engagement  
●take action based on the insights gained through mapping their data 
ecosystem with tools described in the guidebook. 
How are the results of data landscaping exercises 
published and shared? 
As might be expected from the variety of approaches to data landscaping in our 
sample initiatives, a variety of different types of output were produced.  
 
Some of these outputs were developed as a result of using the tools summarised in 
the previous section. Others are the results of data landscaping exercises undertaken 
by data access initiatives or organisations analysing a specific data ecosystem using 
a method that is not covered in the previous section.  
 
Table 2 in the Appendix​ provides some examples of the results of data landscaping 
exercises, with a brief summary of their form and function. 
Main outputs and complementary tools 
We also compared the various output formats of these landscaping activities to 
understand the scope of the analysis, how results are published and what insights 
they offer. 
 
Many of the listed outputs focus on data collection, availability and quality, and they 
publish the results of gap analysis and guidelines on how to strengthen data 
governance in specific sectors.  
 
These outputs are often published as reports that synthesise the key findings from 
the landscaping exercise, with recommendations for the initiative and key 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     19 

 
 
stakeholders.  
 
The reports are often supported by additional structured information, such as 
diagrams of data flows, networks of stakeholders or other aspects of the data 
ecosystem. Data inventories are shared as spreadsheets or are used to populate 
simple data portals. 
Ecosystem engagement 
In most cases data landscaping activities are designed to engage with stakeholders 
and to work in the open. However, if there are privacy concerns or cultural specificity 
it can happen that research engages with a closed ecosystem, where data is not 
widely shared or accessed. 
 
Some initiatives use ecosystem maps as a tool to help describe their environment to 
partners and funders. Others rely on reports, spreadsheets and canvases to 
communicate the data ecosystem to stakeholders.  
Impact assessment 
Overall we found that many of these data landscaping outputs are designed to 
support data access initiatives in understanding value streams in an ecosystem, 
assessing data gaps and increasing engagement with stakeholders and data 
publishers.  
 
We also observed that most toolkits map stakeholder engagement but only a few use 
this exercise for impact assessment. Although some include use cases and lessons 
learned from implementation, they do not emphasise impacts in terms of increasing 
data use, solving the problems they addressed, strengthening data infrastructure or 
reshaping the data access initiative. 
How does data landscaping inform the design of 
initiatives? 
Data access initiatives identified a range of general benefits to the project from 
carrying out data landscaping activities, including: 
 
●Improving and building stakeholder engagement and building community 
through involving them early on the planning and decision making processes. 
●Improving their ability to communicate a project’s outcomes, vision and value 
proposition to senior stakeholders and funders. 
●Engaging with public policy makers to help to get support for the initiative 
and its goals. 
●Furthering peer learning opportunities (if mapping is done collaboratively). 
●Providing an opportunity to re-shape and re-evaluate the scope of a 
programme. 
●Identifying new opportunities, structuring activities internally and prioritising 
next steps. 
 
In terms of guiding how initiatives prioritise and plan work around data infrastructure, 
we identified that data landscaping helps with the following key activities for data 
access initiatives: 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     20 

 
 
 
●Identifying policy recommendations and interventions that could lead to the 
collection, sharing and use of data in line with the goals of the initiative. 
●Identifying data gaps that can be addressed through new data collection 
activities that the initiative can undertake or support. 
●Clarifying barriers or issues with how existing data is currently being 
accessed, used and shared to help facilitate access and use. 
●Identifying where development of new data standards, or the adoption of 
existing standards might help to strengthen data infrastructure. 
●Documenting existing datasets that might be used to help to tackle the goals 
of the initiative. This can help to raise the profile of these resources and drive 
further uses. 
●Describing quality issues, for example in coverage, representation or 
accuracy in existing datasets, that need to be tackled by improving existing 
data infrastructure. 
What did we learn from our research? 
Our research confirmed that organisations involved in early-stage data access 
initiatives need help with better understanding their data ecosystem early on in their 
work. This was true both for mapping out the data ecosystem of a particular use 
case, and for the data ecosystem underpinning an organisation’s business model. 
 
We learnt that the initiatives we looked at are led by subject matter experts who have 
deep content knowledge but not necessarily the right skill set to understand how to 
go about collecting and building the required data infrastructure to tackle a specific 
challenge.  
 
We have seen that early on, people leading data access initiatives face similar 
challenges and have similar user needs to understand: 
 
●what data assets exist in their data ecosystem​, and relevant information 
about these assets such as accessibility, quality, reusability, etc 
●what other data infrastructure exists​ to support the initiative, not just 
technologies and standards but also organisations and communities 
●what policies, regulations and ethical concerns​ influence accessing, using 
and sharing data in the ecosystem 
●how to plan activities​ in order to use and develop the necessary data 
infrastructure to underpin the data access initiative 
●how to engage with different stakeholders​ in the data ecosystem, 
especially those outside of their sector, and how they can contribute to the 
use case or business model. 
 
Our research and user testing has shown that existing tools such as data ecosystem 
mapping and the Data Ethics Canvas are good starting points to address some of 
these existing challenges. We identified additional tools such as Open Data Charter’s 
‘Open up’ guides, the Open Contracting Data Standard and the Data for SGDs 
toolbox that also address pieces of the puzzle. 
 
However, the shortcomings we observed are that each of these tools are designed 
for specific activities within data landscaping, for instance to assess a particular part 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     21 

 
 
of data infrastructure, to publish data openly, or to build a network. Based on the 
outcome of our user research we concluded that it would be useful to invest in 
developing a more versatile toolkit  that can incorporate the various data landscaping 
needs identified. 
 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     22 

 
 
Next Steps 
Our next steps will be to develop prototypes to help address the user needs that we 
have identified.  
 
In the next stage of the product development phase we plan to develop three 
prototypes in fast succession, which we will test with the following groups: 
 
●Organisations we have worked with over the course of the project, in both 
interviews and applied user research such as workshops and working groups 
●Organisations leading or working on data access initiatives that were not part 
of our earlier user research 
●Organisations outside of our typical stakeholder network, specifically those 
representing more diverse views than we have so far, such as indigenous 
data governance groups, data initiatives in the Global South, and data 
initiatives led by and with a focus on various underrepresented groups. 
 
The prototypes may involve: 
 
●iterating or improving on existing tools and guidance developed by the ODI or 
other organisations, for example to highlight how they can be used as part of 
a data landscaping exercise 
●identifying how to combine several tools to conduct a data landscaping 
process 
●developing new tools, guidance or creative outputs that can help to support 
data landscaping activities 
 
Based on the user feedback we will receive from these organisations, we will then 
make a decision to select one tool to take forward for further refinement in a final 
phase of the project. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     23 

 
 
Methodology 
Research Methods 
●Desk research 
We did desk research to identify data ecosystem mapping activities and/or 
data gap analysis to strengthen data infrastructure and tackle a specific 
problem. For more information on these insights see ‘Ecosystem mapping 
research’ above. 
●Interviews & surveys 
We carried out additional user research through email, survey and 
meetings/interviews, with an explicit aim of getting information from 
perspectives that were not included in the desk research phase.  
●Applied user research 
We ran workshops and co-working sessions with a variety of different 
initiatives to explore the needs that emerged in earlier desk and user research 
in more detail. For more information on the tools used see ‘Testing existing 
tools’ above. We sought feedback on outputs such as our ‘​Comparing 
decentralised data publishing initiatives​’ report as part of our commitment to 
work in the open. We contributed to the Open Energy Advisory Groups  
Known limitations and mitigations 
●Capacity constraints for feedback 
The people and organisations that we reach out to to input into our research 
do so without financial compensation, often cutting into their own workdays. 
Although we have tried to reduce the effort it requires from them, research 
subjects are not always able to donate their time for interviews or to 
complete surveys. 
 
In Alpha, we will be working with the winners of our stimulus fund who are 
being compensated for their participation, guaranteeing us a research subject 
cohort. We will also be reaching out to a broader set of stakeholders to 
reduce the reliance on each individual research subject. 
 
●Low stakeholder diversity 
The Open Data Institute has a broad and ever-growing network, however the 
most responsive people in our network tend to reflect the demographics of 
the ODI itself, and are predominantly from the Global North. This means that 
views from the Global South, and explicitly from various underrepresented 
groups, continue to be underrepresented in our research.  
 
To mitigate this, we have started interviewing data access initiatives from the 
Global South, such as ILDA and Data4SDGs, or which address problems 
from marginalised communities, such as the British Columbia First Nations’ 
Data Governance Initiative (BCFNDGI). 
 
In general, we have recently been pushing to explicitly include diversity, 
inclusion and equity in the delivery of our projects, and have discovered tools 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     24 

 
 
and frameworks that could help us be better in this space. Our project has 
aimed to use the ​data feminism​ framework and the ​'Centering racial equity' 
toolkit​ to identify issues around power and equity in data access initiatives. 
We will accelerate this work in the Alpha phase. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     25 

 
 
Appendix 
 
Table 1: Data landscaping tools 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     26 
Resource Source Scope Actors Outputs 
City Data Sharing 
Toolkit 
Future Cities 
Catapult 
Data toolkit 
designed for 
governments and 
institutions with 
recommendations 
for sharing 
non-personal 
urban data 
Local councils Data sharing 
canvas, business 
case, data 
protection impact 
assessment 
Civic Switchboard 
Guide 
Institute of 
Museum and 
Library Services 
A step by step 
guide to help 
libraries 
understand and 
become more 
engaged with their 
local civic data 
ecosystems.  
Local libraries Toolkit and use 
cases 
Consequence 
Scanning 
Doteveryone Toolkit for product 
designers to 
understand 
consequences of 
planned services 
and products 
Product design Case studies and 
toolkit with 
prompts 
Data Challenge 
Prizes for Health: 
a Playbook 
Open Data 
Institute 
Provides a step by 
step guide on how 
to scope out a 
health problem in 
detail and ensure 
it fits within the 
challenge prize 
model 
Public health 
organisations, 
healthcare 
providers, 
policymakers, 
data scientists 
Data challenge 
prize in the health 
sector 
Data ecosystem 
mapping 
Open Data 
Institute 
Illustrates the 
different actors in 
a data ecosystem, 
and how value is 
exchanged across 
it 
Data stewards, 
data users, data 
intermediaries and 
beneficiaries 
Data ecosystem 
map 
Data Ethics 
Canvas 
Open Data 
Institute 
Helps identify and 
manage ethical 
Data stewards, 
data users, data 
Completed data 
ethics canvas 

 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     27 
issues at the start 
of a project that 
uses data, and 
throughout. 
intermediaries and 
beneficiaries 
Data Inventory 
Guide 
GovEx Labs A guide to support 
cities in designing 
data inventories. 
Local 
governments 
Steps, insights 
and use cases 
Guide to civic 
tech and data 
ecosystem 
mapping 
National 
Neighborhood 
Indicators 
Partnership 
(NNIP), Urban 
Institute and 
Living Cities 
A guide on how to 
visualize and 
engage with civic 
tech networks at 
the local level 
Local councils, 
housing agencies 
and civic tech 
community 
Ecosystem 
assessment 
methodology, 
guides and 
resources for 
mapping. 
How to create a 
data inventory 
Open Data 
Institute, CABI 
Provides a 
summary of the 
benefits of 
creating a data 
inventory, an 
outline of the 
steps to do so, 
and metadata 
recommendations  
Data stewards, 
data managers, 
data users 
Data inventory 
Mapping Gender 
Data Availability 
and​ ​Mapping 
gender gaps 
Data 2X/Open 
Data Watch 
Methodology to 
assess 
sex-disaggregate
d data availavility 
based on SDGs 
indicators 
Governments and 
data practitioners 
Data availability 
assessment and 
methodology to 
identify data gaps 
based on SDGs 
Open Up Field 
Guide 
Methodology 
Open Data 
Charter 
A methodology to 
create a guide to 
increase data 
quality and use in 
a specific sector 
Government, field 
experts and data 
practitioners 
Field guide, data 
inventory, data 
governance 
framework 
Open Standards 
for Data 
Guidebook 
Open Data 
Institute 
Helps people and 
organisations 
create, develop 
and adopt open 
standards for data 
Organisations 
developing and 
adopting 
standards 
Open standard for 
data 
The 100 
Questions 
NYU Govlab A methodology to 
build a community 
around a specific 
development 
issue and design 
the questions 
needed to tackle a 
problem, and the 
Governments, 
academia and civil 
society 
Key questions for 
each sector and 
partnerships for 
data 
collaboration.  

 
 
 
 
Table 2: Data landscaping outputs 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     28 
data needed to 
address it 
Toward an open 
data demand 
assessment 
methodology 
IDB/NYU Govlab Methodology to 
assess and 
segment data 
demand of a 
specific sector 
and strategies to 
match with supply 
to create impact. 
Governments and 
civil society 
Canvas and 
methodology to 
develop the 
assessment 
Output Format Methods Noted Description 
Bridging the Gap: 
Mapping Gender 
Data Availability in 
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
Report, 
Country 
Profiles 
Data analysis Detailed review of gender data in 5 
countries, at the international, national and 
microdata levels. Assesses the availability 
of key indicators and presents 
recommendations for improvement. 
Disaggregated 
demographic data 
collection in British 
Columbia: the 
grandmother 
perspective 
Report Community 
consultation, 
desk research 
and policy 
analysis 
Framework for disaggregated data 
collection and recommendations on tools, 
processes and purpose to collect and 
access data from indigenous communities 
Empowering 
communities in EITI 
implementing 
countries 
Report Desk research 
and interviews 
Report with recommendations on how to 
strengthen communications and 
dissemination efforts to broaden and 
deepen local civil society engagement in 
natural resource governance in Colombia, 
Ghana and Indonesia. This study contains 
a mapping for each country, information 
needs and barriers to participation. 
Femicide regional 
standardization 
lessons learned​, 
key indicators ​and 
protocol 
Report, Data 
Protocol and 
indicators 
Desk research, 
workshops, 
expert interviews 
Guidelines  to  enhance data collection and 
establish a data governance to protocolise 
and standardise data on femicides. 
How can a 
sustainable open 
data system 
promote trust in 
Blog post, data 
ecosystem 
map 
Desk research, 
interviews, 
workshops 
Ecosystem mapping and analysis to 
understand the role that a third party data 
institution can play in the development of 
the emergent CCS industrial landscape 

 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     29 
our progress 
towards a net zero 
economy? 
 
How to prioritise 
data for global 
development 
Report, 
Spreadsheet 
Desk research, 
expert 
consultation, use 
case analysis 
Identifies priority list of datasets to be 
released to tackle a range of development 
goals 
Indigenous Data 
Network Roadmap 
Framework 
Report Community 
consultation, 
data analysis 
A framework for auditing and assessing 
data services provided by potential partner 
organisations to the Indigenous Data 
Network 
Mapping data 
ecosystems: 
Government 
Statistical Service 
(GSS) Alpha Project 
Blog post, data 
ecosystem 
map 
Desk research, 
interviews, 
workshops 
Ecosystem mapping and analysis to 
understand how to bring data from  
different government departments together 
so that it is findable by related data 
collection instead of by organisation 
Missing Numbers 
in Children's 
Services 
Report Literature 
Review, Expert 
Interviews 
An assessment to identify how better data 
could improve outcomes for children and 
young people, by conducting a review of 
different types of data, their utility and 
potential impacts of use 
Open Budget Data: 
Mapping the 
Landscape 
Report Literature Review 
Social Network 
Analysis 
Link Analysis 
Empirical mapping and analysis of open 
budget data, drawing on digital methods 
and literature review. Intended to influence 
research direction, drive pilot projects, 
improve access to data, build alignment 
Open Contracting 
Standard 
Development 
History 
Report, ‘Data 
maps’, 
Comparison 
Tool 
Data analysis 
and review 
Interviews 
Mapping of supply and demand side of 
open contracting data, to understand user 
needs and alignment across existing 
datasets 
Open Data 
Challenge Series 
Data Food 
Datasets​, & ​Data 
Guide 
Report, 
Spreadsheet 
Desk research List of suggested datasets useful for 
tackling a specific challenge in the area of 
improving food security. Includes 
assessment of data quality, openness, 
utility, etc. 
Open Up guides on 
climate change​, 
anti corruption​ and 
agriculture  
Airtable with 
key datasets, 
data quality 
assessment 
and publication 
plan 
Desk research, 
workshops with 
public officials 
and data 
exploration with 
civil society 
Report with a set of data assets needed to 
tackle a specific problem and a quality 
assessment (identifying data assets, 
responsible institutions and level of 
openness) 

 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Infrastructure for common challenges – user needs report     30 
360Giving ​Data 
strategy canvas 
Canvas Desk research 
and workshop 
with stakeholders 
Guidelines on how to design a data 
strategy for data projects 