

 

 
Contents 
 
Introduction3 
Initial findings4 
Trust and trustworthiness are highly context-dependent4 
Third-party certifications are useful, but only to a degree and in certain 
contexts6 
The most appropriate method will depend on the context7 
Plans for the development phase10 
Next steps10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, and 
was published in September 2020. The lead authors are Jared Robert Keller, 
Sonia Duarte, Fionntán O'Donnell, Elea Himmelsbach, Renate Samson and Olivier 
Thereaux. 
 
If you would like to send us feedback, please get in contact with us at 
research@theodi.org​. 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from 
the community in the comments. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    2 

 
Introduction 
When sharing or accessing data, organisations need to be able to trust those they 
are interacting with and feel comfortable doing so. Since data ecosystems are 
made up of a range of organisations with different roles and responsibilities, an 
organisation accessing or using data often needs to be able to trust more than the 
organisation holding or providing that data. To some degree they need to be able 
to trust any other organisations involved in the collection, storage, management, 
analysis, sharing or use of that data along the way. 
 
At the Open Data Institute (ODI) we have been conducting a research and 
development project that aims to develop tools and resources to build trust 
between organisations when sharing and accessing data, with the goal of helping 
data ecosystems operate more effectively while reducing the risk of causing harm.  
 
The scope of the project presents an interesting challenge, as it involves concepts 
that can be difficult to pin down. Our previous ​research into designing trustworthy 
data institutions​ has shown, for instance, that ‘trust’ and ‘trustworthiness’ are 
often perceived as nebulous topics. Trust is inherently about relationships and 
1
communication between people and organisations, but it can be difficult for 
multiple parties to align around a shared understanding of what trust and 
trustworthiness mean. Similarly, sharing and increasing access to data can take 
many forms. Our research into the ​wide world of data sharing​ demonstrated that 
there is a range of approaches to sharing data, each of which involves different 
trust relationships and carries different benefits and limitations. Lastly, ​research 
2
by the ODI​ and others found that although there is broad agreement that data 
sharing is beneficial, it is often difficult to quantify the actual ‘value’ or ‘impact’ of 
sharing data. The goal of this project – to ​positively impact​ data ecosystems by 
3
building​ ​trust​ between organisations when ​sharing data​ – is multidimensional and 
challenging, but worthwhile. 
 
This interim report summarises the research conducted over the first phase of the 
project and looks ahead to the coming development phase. In particular, it lays 
out why third-party certifications and audits are useful, but only to an extent and in 
certain contexts. In other cases, alternative approaches to building trust may be 
more appropriate. 
  
1
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​Designing trustworthy data institutions​’. 
2
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​Mapping the wide world of data sharing​’.  
3
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​The Value of Data​’. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    3 

 
Initial findings 
Given the necessarily broad terrain covered by this project, the research phase 
aimed to narrow the scope. We cannot address every challenge related to trust 
and data that organisations might have, so we have focused on defining what is 
in/out of bounds and setting achievable goals. We have outlined a few of our initial 
findings below.  
 
An important learning to come out of our early research (backed up by ​previous 
research at the ODI​) is that there is a difference between ‘being trustworthy’ and 
‘being trusted’. The main difference is that being trusted is relational and involves 
4
an assessment by another party. An organisation might deem themselves 
trustworthy​, but they can only consider themselves ​trusted​ once another 
organisation has placed its trust in them in some way – for instance trusting them 
to perform a service or deliver a product.  
 
Stressing the relational aspect of trust is important, as it highlights that 
organisations need to demonstrate their trustworthiness to specific audiences 
rather than to the world in general. Indeed, our early research for this project has 
confirmed that some organisations think of trust and trustworthiness in general 
terms and do not think deeply enough about how to demonstrate specific aspects 
of their trustworthiness to specific audiences in specific ways.  
 
In light of this, when we speak to organisations we ask them not about trust in 
general, but about how, specifically, they go about ​improving​ and ​demonstrating 
their trustworthiness to other organisations when accessing, using and sharing 
data – and vice versa, how they go about ​assessing​ the trustworthiness of others. 
For instance:  
 
●An organisation might strive to ​improve​ its internal trustworthiness by 
undergoing a training scheme or through conducting ethical reviews.  
●This is often not enough to garner the trust of other organisations, 
however. In order to be trusted, they must ​demonstrate​ their 
trustworthiness to other organisations, perhaps by displaying kitemarks or 
publishing the results of ethical reviews. 
●And since ‘being trusted’ is relational, those other organisations must be 
able to ​assess​ the trustworthiness of that organisation, possibly by 
confirming that it has undergone a relevant training scheme or by locating 
openly-published results of ethical reviews. 
4
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​Designing trustworthy data institutions​’. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    4 

 
Trust and trustworthiness are highly 
context-dependent 
Our research has confirmed that ‘being trustworthy’ means very different things to 
different people – and therefore the methods that people and organisations use to 
improve, demonstrate and assess trustworthiness vary widely depending on the 
context.  
 
For instance, ‘trustworthiness’ means different things to different people and 
organisations. 
●Organisations working in different sectors​. What an organisation does 
to demonstrate trustworthiness in the health sector is different to what 
organisations do in the engineering or finance sectors. This is because 
different sectors have different rules governing ethics and trustworthiness, 
different governing bodies and different forms of sanction, redress and 
liability. In addition, different sectors value and use data in different ways, 
which can produce different business models and priorities within 
organisations. 
●Organisations performing different roles within a sector. ​Even within 
the same sector, what defines a trustworthy ‘data contributor’ is often not 
the same as what defines a trustworthy ‘data intermediary’ or ‘data user’. 
Similarly, people and communities impacted by the sharing of data are 
likely to view trustworthiness differently than regulators, funders or 
policymakers working within that sector.  
●People working in different parts of an organisation.​ Within a single 
organisation, a member of the legal department will have a different view 
of trustworthiness compared to someone working in data management, 
sales or communications, for example. One respondent to our survey, in 
fact, noted they were answering from only one perspective among many 
within their organisation: “This is in my role working with data, I am sure 
that if a different member of our organisation, for example, finance, 
completed this they would respond differently.”  
 
Research and methodologies 
Since May 2020, we have been conducting desk research on this topic, interviewing 
experts and surveying people from organisations involved in sharing or increasing 
access to data.  
●Expert interviews ​–​ ​Between June and August we conducted 10 expert 
interviews with people from organisations performing different roles within data 
ecosystems – for example data contributors, data intermediaries and data users 
– across the health and finance sectors.  
●Qualitative and quantitative survey ​–​ ​In August we launched a survey to 
identify how organisations demonstrate and assess trustworthiness when 
sharing data. The questions were aimed primarily at people working in 
organisations that collect, store, use, access or share data in some way, but we 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    5 

 
welcomed responses from regulators, funders, policymakers and certifying 
bodies as well. To date, the survey has received 59 responses from 
organisations across a dozen sectors. 
●Working in the open​ – Throughout this project we have strived to work in the 
open and have provided regular updates of our progress, including through the 
publication of an ​introductory launch blog post​, a ​work note on the various 
research streams​ of this project and a ​work note detailing the research that 
informed the survey​. 
5
 
The variables outlined above impact how trust and trustworthiness are defined, 
improved, demonstrated and assessed – but they are only a start. We have also 
identified other variables that impact trust and trustworthiness, such as: 
●The maturity of the use case or ecosystem​, for example an established 
ecosystem versus a new or evolving ecosystem.  
●The sensitivity of the data involved​, for example an agreement to share 
non-sensitive data versus an agreement to share highly sensitive or 
personal data.  
●The type of technologies in use,​ especially newer technologies or 
technologies that develop or change quickly. 
●The type of service, product or transaction​, for example a 
business-to-business service versus a business-to-consumer service. 
●The role or importance of data within the organisation involved​, for 
example an organisation whose business model revolves around data in 
some way versus an organisation for whom data is a smaller part of their 
business. 
Third-party certifications are useful, but only to 
a degree and in certain contexts  
One consistent theme that emerged from our desk research, expert interviews and 
survey responses is that there is no single method, approach or mechanism that 
can build trust between organisations in every circumstance and every context. 
There is a wide range of different methods for improving, demonstrating and 
assessing trustworthiness, and different methods are better suited to different 
circumstances, challenges or contexts. What works to build trust between 
organisations in the health sector might not work in finance; and what works to 
build trust between two organisations when sharing data directly might not work 
for an ecosystem of organisations sharing data via an intermediary.  
 
Our research has found that, in particular, while third-party certifications and 
audits are useful for improving, demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness, in 
some cases alternative approaches may be more appropriate.  
5
 The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​Help us understand how certification can help build trust 
in data ecosystems​’; The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​R&D: Building trust through audit and 
certification. Worknote #1​’. The Open Data Institute (2020), ‘​R&D: Building trust through 
audit and certification – Worknote #2​’. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    6 

 
 
For instance, when we asked respondents to rate the usefulness of things like 
third-party assessments, audits and certifications in helping them demonstrate 
their trustworthiness to others, the average rating was 7.8 out of 10 (10 being ‘very 
useful’). Similarly, 71% of respondents said they were either satisfied or very 
satisfied with the certification schemes that existed in their sectors. This was 
borne out in many of our interviews, with one interviewee noting that third-party 
assessments are often needed to “reduce the risk” of “bad things happening”.   
 
However, certifications and audits are often seen as only one approach to 
improving, demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness. Indeed, one respondent 
to our survey wrote that while third-party assessments were “of some use”, they 
were ultimately “only an indicator not a guarantee”. This came out in our 
interviews as well, with some experts noting that in order to build trust between 
organisations, a range of different approaches often need to be deployed in 
tandem. Certifications and audits were seen as offering a useful starting point or 
foundation, but because trust and trustworthiness are highly context-dependent, 
other methods are often necessary, depending on the situation. As one 
interviewee put it: “Certification could provide a very baseline level of assurance 
about a data source, but it would just be the baseline because the data that you 
need is very situational, specific.”  
 
In some circumstances or contexts, certifications and audits are seen as 
unproductive or unsuitable, for a range of reasons, including: 
●A belief that certification or audit processes often cannot keep up with the 
pace of change in the domain, especially the pace of technological 
change. 
●A concern that some assessment schemes can become ‘tick-box 
exercises’ that lack robustness.  
●A concern that some certification and auditing schemes are easily gamed 
or become ‘certification theatre’, where both parties know the certification 
or audit is inadequate but have no incentive to improve it. 
●A feeling that some complex technologies or data flows, for instance 
machine learning algorithms or a system with millions of new data points 
daily, may be hard, if not impossible, to adequately assess.  
 
Finally, some of our interviewees and respondents noted that third-party 
assessments can, in certain cases, actually be harmful. In particular they noted 
that certification and auditing schemes can hinder innovation if they are costly and 
time consuming. This was seen to lock some smaller organisations out of the 
market, especially if the schemes are mandatory. One of the respondents to our 
survey, for instance, noted: “As a startup, I am concerned about losing access 
due to higher ‘costs of doing business’, or worse, a ‘pay-to-play’ culture.”  
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    7 

 
The most appropriate method will depend on 
the context 
Because third-party assessments, certifications and audits are only useful in some 
contexts, and because there is a wide range of different methods for improving, 
demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness, we surveyed a range of 
organisations in different sectors to gather their views on the value of third-party 
assessments and to understand how they demonstrate and assess 
trustworthiness when sharing data.  
 
The first section of the survey focused on identifying which aspects of an 
organisation are the most important when it comes to demonstrating 
trustworthiness. Organisations are multifaceted, after all, so demonstrating 
trustworthiness is multifaceted as well. By drawing on our desk research, expert 
interviews and other research at the ODI we have been able to put together a list 
of different aspects of an organisation that organisations might feel the need to 
show are trustworthy. In the survey we posed the question, ‘what about your 
organisation do you try to demonstrate is trustworthy?’ and asked respondents to 
rank the list in terms of priority for their organisation.  
 
The list currently includes things like: 
1.Your legal structure and compliance with relevant laws or regulations 
2.Your software and technical infrastructure 
3.Your information governance framework (eg data management and data 
protection procedures) 
4.Your commercial practices and how ‘value’ is created or shared 
5.Your decision-making processes for how data is collected, managed, 
used and shared 
6.Your ethical review procedures and how you work to minimise bias or 
harms 
7.Your oversight, accountability and redress procedures 
8.Your transparency or engagement procedures 
9.The capabilities and expertise of the individuals working within your 
organisation (for example demonstrating that they are good practitioners) 
10.The datasets you supply (for example quality, safety, value) 
11.The services you deliver (for example quality, safety, value) 
12.The products you provide (for example quality, safety, value) 
13.Your commitment to ‘public good’ or having a ‘positive impact’ 
14.Your diversity and inclusion practices 
15.Your financial sustainability 
16.Your environmental sustainability 
 
We asked the same question for ​assessing​ the trustworthiness of other 
organisations. The list is a work in progress, so if there is anything that you believe 
is missing from our list, please ​get in touch​ to let us know. 
 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    8 

 
A few noteworthy initial findings 
●Respondents to our survey stressed the importance of being able to 
demonstrate their commitment to ‘public good’.​ When asked ‘what about 
your organisation do you try to prove is trustworthy?’, a commitment to ‘public 
good’ or ‘social impact’ was ranked the second most important aspect of an 
organisation. However, when asked ‘which aspects of other organisations are 
important to assess?’, a commitment to ‘public good’ or ‘social impact’ was 
ranked eighth. More work will need to be done to identify how representative 
the results of our survey are, but they suggest that while organisations are often 
concerned with ​demonstrating​ their commitment to public good, many appear 
to be less concerned with ​assessing​ whether others share that same 
commitment.  
●Efforts to build trust have frequently been reactive rather than proactive. 
Throughout our research we have come across instances where methods have 
been developed for improving, demonstrating or assessing trustworthiness as a 
reaction to an event, such as a reputational issue, a legal challenge or a system 
security concern. We also found that unless there is a clear incentive, 
developing methods for building trust can be drawn out, complex or difficult to 
agree. However, a starting point for organisations can be first engaging in 
low-effort or low-risk situations, where trust is much more easily built. In these 
cases, it is less about demonstrating trustworthiness and more about having no 
reason to distrust. From these situations, trust can be built for more complex or 
higher-risk situations. 
 
In addition to asking people ​what​ about their organisation they strive to 
demonstrate is trustworthy, the survey also asked people ​how​ they go about 
doing so. We wanted to identify to what extent organisations use other methods 
or approaches to demonstrate and assess trustworthiness outside of third-party 
assessments, certifications and audits. Through our desk research, interviews and 
survey we have assembled a list of almost 20 ways that organisations 
demonstrate trustworthiness, including:  
 
1.Committing to specific legal agreements – for example contracts, terms 
and conditions or licenses 
2.Abiding by relevant laws and regulations 
3.Abiding by relevant standards (technical or data or quality) 
4.Committing to relevant principles or values  
5.Committing to relevant best practice or codes of conduct 
6.Committing to relevant organisational or industry norms 
7.Attaining relevant certifications (at an organisational level) 
8.Attaining relevant certifications (at an individual level – that is, for 
practitioners within the organisation) 
9.Displaying relevant kitemarks, stamps or labels 
10.Undergoing tests or exams (either of your organisation, your people, or 
your products) 
11.Undergoing or undertaking auditing schemes 
12.Answering queries or sitting for interviews 
13.Agreeing to performance monitoring or oversight 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    9 

 
14.Agreeing to penalties or redress mechanisms 
15.Embedding regular internal review processes 
16.Embedding independent advisory processes – for example citizen juries, 
ethics panels or data access boards 
17.Committing to proactive transparency – for example the publication of 
earnings reports, decision logs or the minutes of meetings 
18.Engaging and communicating with users, stakeholders or community 
members  
19.Through implementing technologies designed to underpin or improve trust 
 
As above, if there is anything that you believe is missing from our list, please 
contact us​ to let us know. 
  
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    10 

 
Plans for the 
development phase 
Providing an organisation with an approach to how they can build trust depends 
on a wide range of variables. Therefore the development phase of this project will 
focus on working with people and organisations in a range of contexts to identify 
their specific trust-related challenges and potentially co-create guidance, tools or 
resources that can help them address their specific needs.  
 
Focusing on addressing concrete, trust-related needs will enable us to take an 
in-depth look at real data ecosystems, the trust relationships between different 
actors and how trustworthiness is improved, demonstrated and assessed within 
those ecosystems. Furthermore, by creating, testing and iterating potential tools 
or resources with the actors and stakeholders involved in those contexts, we can 
help ensure that what we produce will be fit-for-purpose, useful and therefore 
more likely to be adopted. A useful approach is unlikely to be developed unless 
we are led by the people who understand the domain; our research has shown 
that creating a certification or audit that is inadequate can actually be harmful 
since, among other things, it can give organisations a false sense of security and 
leave them unaware of potential risks. Our research has also shown that there 
must be transparency around what is being certified, who is doing the certifying 
and why. As one of the respondents to our survey put it: “If I have no real say in 
what the standards are, I'm much less likely to buy into them.” One of the best 
ways of helping to ensure this is to develop them with input from the relevant 
communities.  
 
In some cases, we may find that people and organisations in a specific context 
would benefit from an auditing scheme or agreed standards that could eventually 
form the basis of a certification scheme. But in other cases we may find that 
things like guidance, training tools or a checklist of resources would help 
organisations improve, demonstrate and assess trustworthiness more effectively 
than standards and certifications. 
 
The insights and lessons we draw from this development work will be applicable 
beyond the specific ecosystems and use cases we looked into. We therefore see 
the development phase as ultimately contributing to our ability to offer overarching 
guidance and lessons to organisations in disparate contexts.  
 
Because of the nature of this work, we see it as contributing to a necessarily 
longer term research endeavour. Further work from ourselves or other interested 
organisations will undoubtedly be needed. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    11 

 
Next steps 
Over the next six months, this project will progress through discovery, to alpha 
and then beta. During the discovery phase we will identify pressing challenges or 
opportunities related to trust and data, test some of our initial findings with 
organisations in those areas, identify their specific trust-related challenges and 
develop initial ideas for tools or resources that could address those challenges. As 
we move into the alpha phase, we will develop basic prototypes that we can put in 
front of potential users. The beta phase will involve taking the best idea(s) from the 
alpha phase and creating a refined version, ready to test on users. 
 
Based on our research, one of the areas where we believe we can have the 
greatest impact in improving trust between organisations is in ‘less mature’ 
contexts. Our research has shown that in mature, traditional or static contexts, 
organisations tend to have well-established mechanisms for improving, 
demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness; in less mature contexts, previous 
understandings of trust and trustworthiness may need to be renegotiated and 
redefined and previously satisfactory methods for building trust may need to be 
recontextualised, updated or replaced. In these types of areas, building trust is 
particularly important, but particularly difficult. 
 
Within the development phase, we are therefore interested in exploring a range of 
different ‘emerging’ contexts, such as: 
●‘New’ use cases ​– for example, new uses of data or the repurposing of 
data in novel ways. For instance, the mobility and transport sector where 
location data is increasingly being repurposed for novel uses; or the health 
sector where data not traditionally viewed as health data (eg fitness data) 
is being used to make health decisions. These novel uses often outpace 
the development and adaptation of methods previously used to build trust 
when sharing data, so it can be difficult for organisations to improve, 
demonstrate or assess trustworthiness around these new uses of data. 
●‘Evolving’ data ecosystems​, for example, ecosystems where new 
intermediaries are being installed or organisations are taking on new roles 
as data stewards or data institutions. For instance, the health or mobility 
sectors where organisations are seeking to play the role of independent, 
third-party stewards of data. The introduction of these ‘new actors’ into 
existing ecosystems requires the existing actors in those ecosystems to 
reassess their roles and to potentially adapt existing mechanisms (or 
introduce new mechanisms) for improving, demonstrating or assessing 
trustworthiness. 
●‘Emerging’ sectors​, for example, less-established sectors where roles 
and responsibilities have yet to be settled and methods of building trust 
have yet to be agreed. For instance, the new sector that is consolidating 
around ‘alternative’ forms of investment data, or ‘alt data’. Within this new 
sector, data is being used in new ways, new data contributors are 
proliferating and organisations are unsure who they can trust. These 
emerging sectors often have ad hoc ways of improving, demonstrating or 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    12 

 
assessing trustworthiness, but few established, scalable ways of doing so 
and little shared understanding of best practice or standards. 
 
We will also be working with Frontier Economics, an economics research firm, to 
quantify the economic impact of increased trust between organisations in data 
ecosystems. At the ODI we have conducted research into the ways that trust can 
be established and built when sharing and accessing data. There is also a large 
amount of research into the relationship between data sharing and economic 
impact. The research with Frontier Economics will seek to address the evidence 
gap between these two areas and attempt to quantify the economic impact of 
increased trust between organisations when sharing and accessing data. 
 
If you are an organisation that collects, manages, shares, accesses or uses data, 
we would love to speak with you​ about how you improve and demonstrate your 
trustworthiness and assess the trustworthiness of others. 
 
During the development phase of this project we are likely to convene stakeholder 
workshops to test initial designs and gather feedback. If you would like to take 
part in these workshops or provide feedback as a ‘critical friend’ during this 
phase, please ​get in touch​.  
 
We believe, after all, that only by collaborating with stakeholders and members of 
data ecosystems will we be able to help organisations build trust when sharing 
and accessing data, thereby helping to increase the sustainability and 
effectiveness of data ecosystems while reducing the risk of causing harm. 
 
Open Data Institute | September 2020                    Demonstrating and assessing trustworthiness when sharing data    13 