

 

 
Contents 
Executive summary 
Introduction 
The growth of data collection in the private sector 
Supporting sharing of data across the private sector 
The role of the private sector in data ecosystems 
Data as an enabler of new business models 
Data as enabler for existing business models 
Cross-cutting challenges driving the sharing of data 
Changing regulatory environment 
Increasing need for collaboration 
Increasingly competitive markets 
Demands for more data to harness new technologies 
Climate and environmental challenges 
How can sharing data create value? 
Improving market reach 
Benchmarking and insights 
Open innovation 
Benefits of regulated sharing 
Supply chain optimisation 
Addressing sector challenges 
Building trust 
Recommendations 
Appendix: Methodology 
Discovery 
Alpha 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
This report was produced as part of a three-year innovation programme funded by 
Innovate UK. The views in this report are those of the authors. 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute (ODI), 
and was published in March 2020. The lead authors are Josh D’Addario, Leigh 
Dodds, Walter Brown, James Maddison; ODI.  
 
To share feedback by email or to get in touch, contact the private sector data-sharing 
project lead, ​Josh D’Addario​. To share feedback in the comments, highlight the 
relevant piece of text and click the ‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of 
the page. 
 
 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions from 
the community in the comments. 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   3 

 
Executive summary 
 
Businesses can create value by using third-party data to develop new products and 
services. But our research has shown that they can unlock more value by sharing 
data they have collected. 
 
A changing landscape of consumer and citizen rights, and expectations over privacy 
and data portability, require businesses to improve how they access, use and share 
data. This creates both new challenges and new opportunities. 
 
Increasingly competitive markets and complex supply chains require businesses to 
rethink how they drive innovation; they can no longer expect competitive solutions to 
solely come from their internal teams. 
 
Use of artificial intelligence and machine learning is leading to increased demands for 
data, which can be costly for individual organisations to collect and maintain. The 
changing climate puts pressure on businesses across sectors, requiring them to 
adapt to common challenges. 
 
This report summarises our research exploring how businesses across a range of 
sectors are sharing data in ways that directly and indirectly deliver value.  
 
Sharing data can assist companies in increasing revenue, reducing direct costs, and 
improving efficiency in operations. Our research has highlighted seven key business 
benefits of sharing data: improving market reach; supporting benchmarking and 
insights; driving open innovation; driving supply chain optimisation; embracing 
regulated data sharing; addressing sector challenges; and building trust. Further 
research may identify additional benefits. 
 
In this report we explore how commercial organisations participate in data 
ecosystems, the variety of challenges facing businesses, and describe the seven 
types of value creation. A series of case studies provide real-world examples of 
businesses that have successfully adopted each approach. 
  
Supporting businesses to unlock the value of data – in ways that will help address a 
variety of social, environmental and economic problems – requires action by a range 
of stakeholders. 
 
Businesses must work together to create a stronger data infrastructure that supports 
the data sharing across sectors. There is a role for professional bodies and industry 
groups to convene businesses and explore the benefits of sharing data and 
encourage collaboration. Governments need to continue to explore ways to both 
incentivise and require businesses to increase access to data that can create wider 
benefits. 
 
In short, businesses, governments and professional associations need to work 
together to build an open, trustworthy data ecosystem that maximises the value of 
data, while mitigating potential harms.  
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   4 

 
Introduction 
 
Businesses around the world are rushing to unlock value from ever increasing 
volumes of data. 
 
The European Commission has estimated that the European Union (EU) data 
economy was worth €300bn in 2016, and estimates that this will increase to €739bn 
in 2020. McKinsey has projected that data-enabled applications of artificial 
1
intelligence (AI) will generate $13tn in new global economic activity by 2030. 
2
 
The routine collection of data from digital services and products, cheap sensors, 
increasing connectivity, and easy access to large-scale computing platforms, are 
enabling businesses of all sizes to create new products and services, and become 
more data-informed. However, skills and expertise are becoming limiting factors. 
The growth of data collection in the private sector  
 
Historically, this ability to collect detailed data about our society, economy and 
environment was restricted to national governments and agencies. But this capability 
is now accessible to many businesses, through routine data collection from their 
products and services, or by collecting and combining data from multiple sources.  
 
Google and Apple are now creating ​some of the world’s most accurate and widely 
used maps, outstripping the capabilities of national mapping agencies. The Weather 
3
Company, among others, is competing with national meteorological services for a 
share of ​the weather data market​. Social networks and digital advertising networks 
4
are collecting large amounts of demographic data about individuals, including 
profiling their social and economic activities.  
5
 
Analysis of the growth of the data economy and, in particular, the potential impacts of 
the open data movement, have tended to focus on the untapped potential of 
government data, with the private sector playing a role in unlocking that value. For 
example: 
 
1
 European Commission (2017), ‘Final results of the European Data Market study measuring the size and trends 
of the EU data economy’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/final-results-european-data-market-study-measuring-si
ze-and-trends-eu-data-economy 
2
 ​McKinsey (2018), ‘Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy’, 
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-from-the-ai-frontier-modeling-the-
impact-of-ai-on-the-world-economy#part1 
3
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘The UK’s geospatial data infrastructure: challenges and opportunities’, 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/17tPPEi4HHkSkSiLfhp7FkMakx11sIHAoo58v729yU7k/edit#heading
=h.iajg2z7wdbnj  
4
 ​Open Data Institute (2017), ‘The state of weather data infrastructure – white paper’, 
https://theodi.org/article/4021/  
5
 The Guardian (2018), ‘Are you ready? Here is all the data Facebook and Google have on you’, 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/mar/28/all-the-data-facebook-google-has-on-you-priv
acy#  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   5 

 
●The $3tn per year valuation of the open data market by McKinsey in 2013 centred 
on the value of combining open government data with shared data held by 
businesses.  
6
●In 2014, Lateral Economics estimated that the potential value of open data to the 
G20 would be around $2.6tn a year, contributing to aggregate the group’s 
cumulative gross domestic product (GDP) of around 1.1% from 2014–2019, or 
55% of the G20’s 2% additional growth target. 
7
●In 2020, the European Data Portal estimated that the value of open data for the 
EU28+  was €184bn in 2019, and forecast it to reach between €199.51 and 
€334.21bn by 2025. The report also looked at employment figures, with 1.09 
million open data employees in 2019 and 1.12 to 1.97 million open data 
employees forecast by 2025. 
8
●Transport for London has reported that use of its open data has allowed private 
sector companies to contribute between £12m and £15m per year to the London 
economy. 
9
 
With private sector collection of data now outstripping that of governments, greater 
attention is being paid to the need to increase access to data held by commercial 
organisations. 
 
Continued growth of the data economy requires increased sharing of data between 
businesses, and between businesses and government. Data needs to flow across all 
actors, in order that its use can create economic, social and environmental value. 
Supporting sharing of data across the private 
sector 
 
To facilitate access to data, governments are exploring ways to address the need to 
increase access to private sector data.  
 
One approach has been through regulation, for example, open banking and related 
10
regulations in the banking and finance sectors. Policymakers in cities around the 
world are looking to introduce regulations that allow them to access data held by 
ride-sharing companies, to inform transport policies. 
11
 
But, while regulation can require sharing of data, other approaches are needed to 
ensure that sharing data can be routinely carried out under beneficial terms, while 
ensuring it is used in safe, ethical ways that minimise harms. 
 
6
 McKinsey Global Institute (2013), ‘Open data: Unlocking innovation and performance with liquid information’, 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/open-data-unlocking-innovati
on-and-performance-with-liquid-information  
7
 Lateral Economics (2014), ‘Open for Business: How Open Data Can Help Achieve the G20 Growth Target’, 
https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/files/file_archive/insights/ON%20Report_061114_FNL.pdf  
8
 European Data Portal (2020), ‘The Economic Impact of Open Data: Opportunities for value creation in 
Europe’, ​https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/the-economic-impact-of-open-data.pdf  
9
 ​Transport for London (2017), ‘​TfL’s free open data boosts London's economy​’ 
https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2017/october/tfl-s-free-open-data-boosts-london-s-econo
my  
10
 Financial Times (2019), ‘Open banking: the quiet digital revolution one year on’, 
https://www.ft.com/content/a5f0af78-133e-11e9-a581-4ff78404524e  
11
 ​NYU Wagner (2019), ‘E-Hail Regulation in Global Cities’, 
 ​https://wagner.nyu.edu/impact/research/publications/e-hail-regulation-global-cities 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   6 

 
Some businesses are routinely sharing data with each other. A 2015 ​study of 270 UK 
companies by the Open Data Institute (ODI)​ showed that about half used data from 
non-government sources, including other companies. A 2019 EU consultation of 
12
nearly 1,000 small businesses found that a third acquire data from other companies.  
13
 
However, many businesses are still struggling to see the value of sharing data. A 
report by the Lloyd’s Register Foundation highlighted that businesses in the 
14
engineering and construction sectors are still cautious about sharing data. Issues 
include commercial and legal risks around sharing data, and a lack of clarity around 
the benefits of sharing data. 
 
The ODI’s experience of engaging with our commercial partners, and our user 
15
research on what organisations need in order to share more data, reflects this wider 
16
uncertainty on both strategic and operational issues. 
 
Frameworks to support legal, ethical and trustworthy sharing of data are clearly 
necessary. The EU is currently developing guidance to help build confidence around 
approaches to sharing data across the private sector. The draft guidance includes 
17
five principles for business-to-business sharing of data, covering transparency, 
shared value creation, respect for commercial interests, ensuring undistorted 
competition, and minimising data lock-in.  
18
 
The EU-funded Data Pitch project was intended to develop practical insights and 
drive innovation around sharing data between businesses. 
19
 
A UK government discussion paper on the economic value of data identified five 
challenges for the UK economy, and recommended the enabling of safe, legal data 
20
sharing, in part by developing repeatable terms for sharing data between businesses, 
under mutually beneficial agreements.  
 
Other approaches involve exploring the use of a wider set of ​data access models​, 
21
like ​data trusts​. Data trusts, inspired by legal trusts, enable people or organisations 
22
to share data with others, with data governance decisions made by ‘trustees’ with 
fiduciary responsibilities. They represent one kind of ‘data institution’; an organisation 
with some level of responsibility for stewarding data. 
23
12
 ​Open Data Institute (2015), ‘Open data means business’, 
https://theodi.org/article/open-data-means-business/  
13
 European Commission (2019), ‘SME panel consultation – B2B Data Sharing’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/sme-panel-consultation-b2b-data-sharing  
14
 ​Lloyd’s Register Foundation (2019), ‘Insight report on sharing engineering data’, 
https://www.lrfoundation.org.uk/en/news/insight-report-on-data/ 
15
 ​Open Data Institute (2017), ‘The value of open data for the private sector’, 
https://theodi.org/article/the-value-of-open-data-for-the-private-sector/ 
16
 ​Open Data Institute (2018), ‘What organisations need in order to share more data: our research’, 
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/ 
17
 ​European Commission (2019), ‘Guidance on private sector data sharing’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/guidance-private-sector-data-sharing 
18
 ​European Commission (2018), ‘Staff Working Document – Guidance on sharing private sector data in the 
European data economy’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/staff-working-document-guidance-sharing-private-sect
or-data-european-data-economy 
19
 ​Data Pitch (2020), ‘Data Pitch Impact Assessment: our learnings’, 
https://datapitch.eu/news/data-pitch-impact-assessment-our-learnings/ 
20
 ​HM Treasury (2018), ‘The economic value of data: discussion paper’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-economic-value-of-data-discussion-paper 
21
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Mapping the wide world of data sharing’, 
https://theodi.org/project/the-data-access-map/  
22
 Open Data Institute (2019), ‘Data trusts: lessons from three pilots (report)’, 
https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/  
23
 Open Data Institute (2020), ‘What do we mean by data institutions?’, 
https://theodi.org/article/what-do-we-mean-by-data-institutions/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   7 

 
But, there is also a need to clearly articulate the business benefits of sharing data. 
This is the goal of this report. 
 
We explore how businesses are generating value by sharing data with others, 
including suppliers, partners and even competitors.  
 
We also look at how private sector businesses can unlock value by sharing data.  
 
In the following sections we provide some background on the roles that commercial 
businesses play in data ecosystems, and the cross-cutting challenges faced by 
businesses across a range of sectors.  
 
We then document seven ways in which companies create direct bottom-line benefits 
by sharing data they have collected. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   8 

 
The role of the private sector 
in data ecosystems 
 
The concept of a​ business ecosystem​ has been defined as ‘an economic 
community supported by a foundation of interacting organizations and individuals’.  
24
 
The network of organisations in an ecosystem includes suppliers, distributors, 
customers, competitors, government agencies, and other organisations involved the 
delivery of a specific product or service through both competition and cooperation. 
25
 
The ODI has defined a ​data ecosystem​ as consisting of ​data infrastructure – such 
26
as data assets, standards, technologies, policies – and the people, communities and 
organisations that benefit from the value created by it.  
27
 
The two terms are closely aligned. The increasing importance of data in 
business-to-business interactions makes it an important element in understanding 
the changing forms of value exchange and interactions within ecosystems. An 
28
emphasis on data helps bring focus to how the flow of data is essential to value 
creation. 
 
While businesses can play a variety of roles in a data ecosystem, they broadly fall 
29
into one or more of the following: 
 
●Consumer​. Directly benefiting from consuming third-party data or insights, to 
improve their products, services and business processes. 
●Intermediary​. Aggregating and sharing data sourced from third parties, to provide 
data products or insights to downstream consumers of data. Data intermediaries 
are organisations and individuals located in a data supply chain. 
30
●Provider​. Publishing data and sharing data with other businesses, communities, 
individuals or government agencies, to provide insights or enable innovation and 
collaboration. 
 
To properly understand the value to the private sector of sharing data, we need to 
consider each of these roles and how use of data enables both new and existing 
business models. 
 
  
24
 ​Moore (1996), ‘The death of competition: leadership and strategy in the age of business ecosystems’ 
25
 ​Investopedia, ‘What is a business ecosystem?’, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/business-ecosystem.asp  
26
 ​Open Data Institute (2016), ‘What is data infrastructure?’, ​https://theodi.org/topic/data-infrastructure/  
27
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Mapping data ecosystems: methodology’, 
https://theodi.org/article/mapping-data-ecosystems/  
28
 Gartner (2017), ‘8 Dimensions of Business Ecosystems’, 
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/8-dimensions-of-business-ecosystems/  
29
 ​Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Mapping data ecosystems: methodology’​, 
https://theodi.org/article/mapping-data-ecosystems/  
30
 Web Foundation (2015), ‘Open data intermediaries in developing countries’, 
http://webfoundation.org/docs/2015/08/ODDC_2_Open_Data_Intermediaries_15_June_2015_FINAL.pdf 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   9 

 
Data as an enabler of new business models 
 
A data business is a private sector organisation that uses, produces, or otherwise 
invests in data as a key element of their business model. Accessing, sharing and 
publishing data are key focuses of their operational activities. 
 
Our research into open data businesses has identified a variety of business models, 
31
including: 
 
●Creating value through publishing​. Cities promote companies like BikeCitizens 
and Green City Solutions because of the value of the data that they generate and 
share or publish as a result of their main business of providing bike share 
programmes and reducing air pollution, respectively. 
●Generating revenue through publishing​. Data businesses can use freemium and 
cross-subsidy models to generate revenue from publishing open data. Freemium 
models grant access to open data while introducing premium paid tiers for certain 
types of access or value-added services. Cross-subsidy models use free open 
data services to attract customers to other paid-for services, or to generate leads 
for other business opportunities. 
●Combining data from multiple sources​. Data businesses often rely on various 
data sources, internal and external, open and shared, to be combined in 
innovative ways to help customers solve problems. 
 
Business models that have proved to be successful for open source are also relevant 
to data businesses. For example, service provision, freemium models, collaborative 
management and cross-subsidies. 
32
 
A taxonomy of data-driven business models developed by the University of 
Cambridge identifies six categories: 
33
 
●Free data collector and aggregator​ – creation and distribution of aggregated 
data collected from primarily public and open sources. 
●Analytics-as-a-service ​– providing analysis of data provided by customers, with 
insights delivered as data to be used by customers. 
●Data generation and analysis​ – creation of new data assets for reuse by others. 
●Free data knowledge discovery​ – provision of insights, including 
recommendations, monitoring and analytics, using public and openly available 
data. 
●Data-aggregation-as-a-service​ – aggregation of internal sources of data, for 
example about customers, across an organisation. 
●Multi-source data mash-up and analysis​ – combining shared, public and open 
data to provide analytics and insights. 
 
Taxonomies and analyses of this type are particularly helpful in identifying new 
opportunities and business models within the broader data economy. They are 
particularly relevant for startups and small businesses developing new products and 
services within the data economy. But how do we understand the role of publishing 
and sharing data within existing business models? 
31
 Open Data Institute (2018), ‘Data entrepreneurship: exploring successful business models with open data’, 
https://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/ODI_ODINE-2018-1-3.pdf  
32
 Jeni’s Musings (2012), ‘Open data business models’, 
https://www.jenitennison.com/2012/08/20/open-data-business-models.html  
33
 University of Cambridge (2014), ‘Big data for big business? A taxonomy of data-driven business models used 
by start-up firms”, 
https://cambridgeservicealliance.eng.cam.ac.uk/resources/Downloads/Monthly%20Papers/2014_March_D
ataDrivenBusinessModels.pdf  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   10 

 
Data as enabler for existing business models 
 
Many companies will not see themselves as ‘data businesses’, because their primary 
focus – for example the provision of fitness classes, designing aircraft or delivering 
manufactured components – is not centred on the collection or publication of data. 
But data is becoming an increasingly important part of their daily operations. 
 
The growth of data-related roles in the private sector, such as the Chief Data Officer 
(CDO), and the continued increase in demand for data scientists, shows that many 
3435
businesses are moving to improve their use, management and governance of data in 
order to improve decision making and drive innovation. 
 
A 2015 study into the use and application of analytics within businesses identified 
three levels of maturity across organisations that were driving competitive advantage 
and innovation. ‘Analytical Innovators’ were identified as being ‘more strategic in 
36
their application of analytics, place a high value on data, and have higher levels of 
data management and analytical skills’.  
 
An updated report by the same authors in 2017 further explored the use of analytics 
as a source of business innovation, using the same model. They found that 
37
‘Analytical Innovators’ were using data and analytics to explore incremental 
innovation in existing products, services and processes, as well as creating new 
products, services and business models. 
 
The authors noted that organisations with a high ability to innovate were sharing data 
both internally and beyond company borders at much higher levels than other 
organisations. Making data ‘shareable by default’ is therefore important to enabling 
38
innovation within businesses and across their ecosystems. 
 
The focus of our analysis and of the case studies presented in this report has been on 
exploring the benefits to individual organisations of sharing data with their 
ecosystems. 
 
  
34
 Gartner (2019), ‘Gartner Research Board identifies the Chief Data Officer 4.0’, 
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2019-07-30-gartner-research-board-identifies-the-
chief-data-officer-4point0  
35
 TechTarget (2019), ‘Demand for data scientists is booming and will only increase’, 
https://searchbusinessanalytics.techtarget.com/feature/Demand-for-data-scientists-is-booming-and-will-in
crease 
36
 Ransbotham, Kiron, Prentice (2015), ‘Minding the analytics gap”, 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/minding-the-analytics-gap/  
37
 ​Ransbotham, Kiron (2017), ‘Analytics as a source of business innovation’, 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/analytics-as-a-source-of-business-innovation/ 
38
 ​Thomson Reuters, Open Data Institute (2016), ‘Shareable by default: creating resilient data ecosystems’, 
https://theodi.org/article/white-paper-shareable-by-default-creating-resilient-data-ecosystems/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   11 

 
Cross-cutting challenges 
driving the sharing of data 
 
Businesses across a range of sectors are facing a number of common challenges 
that are driving them to explore the value of sharing data. 
 
Changing regulatory environment 
 
Changing expectations around privacy and data protection mean that companies are 
having to re-evaluate their approach to collecting, managing and sharing data. 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and similar regulations include data 
portability provisions that require businesses to share more data with their customers 
and users.  
 
Sector-specific regulation, aimed at creating fairer markets, is also increasingly aimed 
at ensuring businesses share more data with regulators and their broader ecosystem. 
 
Increasing need for collaboration 
 
Platform business models, complex supply chains and service delivery models, and 
opportunities to deliver complementary products and services, are requiring 
businesses to share more information, business intelligence and insight. 
 
Increasingly competitive markets 
 
Globalisation and increased use of digital products and services means that 
businesses are facing an increasingly competitive marketplace. Sharing and using 
data internally can help to drive innovation within existing business processes and 
services, and can help to reduce costs; as can sharing data across supply chains, for 
example. 
 
The ability to access more competitive intelligence on market size is leading to 
organisations sharing data with analytics firms. 
 
Demands for more data to harness new technologies 
 
New technologies such as AI and machine learning require access to large volumes 
of data. These technologies are being used to innovate in existing sectors and are 
driving the growth of emerging sectors, for example autonomous vehicles.  
 
Without sharing data, businesses face the cost of collecting and labelling data. By 
engaging in pre-competitive collaboration with others in their sector to collect 
necessary data, companies may be able to share costs and reduce time to market. 
 
Climate and environmental challenges 
 
The challenges presented by a changing environment are an issue for businesses in 
all sectors.  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   12 

 
How can sharing data 
create value? 
After analysing over 80 examples of data sharing across a range of business 
ecosystems, we have identified seven categories of value generation. These are 
outlined in the following section, along with links to illustrative case studies. 
 
 
​This image is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 
4.0 International License 
 
 
Improving market reach 
 
Increasing access to data can promote products and services to a wider range of 
customers. By making information about products and services findable and 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   13 

 
accessible to a new audience – one that is not being served by current sales and 
marketing efforts – businesses can generate new sales and opportunities.  
 
Sharing and opening data about their products and services allows businesses to 
work with third parties that can:  
 
●widen their pool of potential customers​ by supporting the creation of new 
discovery tools, such as tailored search engines and recommendation systems, 
that are designed around the needs of specific communities  
●develop complementary products and services​ that will support specific 
customers, while driving revenue to existing product lines. 
 
Businesses in a wide range of sectors have long been sharing data and information 
as a means to increase their market reach. Our research has found that by sharing 
reference data about available products, coupled with data and application 
programming interfaces (APIs) that support creating transactions (purchasing a 
product, placing a booking), businesses can generate additional revenue and reach a 
broader market. Availability of this information might also help them better engage 
with their existing customer base.  
Benchmarking and insights 
Increasing access to data for benchmarking against other organisations can provide 
useful insight to inform and shape decision making. Companies can use 
benchmarking against cross-industry metrics and best practices to: 
 
●drive investment decisions ​by understanding how competitors are investing in 
new technologies, like AI 
39
●increase efficiency and productivity ​by comparing spending and performance 
with similar organisations to drive operational changes 
40
●improve equality and diversity​ in the workplace by benchmarking salaries to 
create fairer pay banding and improve hiring practices 
41
●address health and safety issues​ by understanding frequency of accidents and 
acting to address potential issues 
42
●improve sales processes ​by understanding more about patterns of procurement.
  
43
 
Sharing data is fundamental to successful benchmarking to allow for comparison 
across a range of organisations working in the same industry. But businesses are 
reluctant to share data directly with their competitors. Individual competitor 
organisations can, however, share data with cross-industry organisations, who then 
pool the data to create aggregate datasets that can be analysed to deliver individual 
insights. 
 
39
 McKinsey Digital (2017), ‘Building efficient IT organizations: Insights from our benchmarks’, 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/building-efficient-it-organizati
ons-insights-from-our-benchmarks 
40
 ​Designing Buildings Wiki (2019), ‘Project benchmarking’,. 
https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Project_benchmarking 
41
 UK Gender Pay Gap Service (nd), ​https://gender-pay-gap.service.gov.uk/  
42
 ​Health and Safety Executive (2019), ‘PABIAC 2015-2019 Strategy’ 
https://www.hse.gov.uk/paper/pabiac-strategy.htm 
43
 Spend Network (nd), ​https://www.spendnetwork.com/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   14 

 
Case study: HiLo Maritime Risk Management 
 
Our benchmarking and insights case study describes how competitor 
organisations in the maritime sector are sharing data with HiLo Maritime Risk 
Management, enabling it to deliver insights to improve safety in the shipping 
industry. 
 
Read the case study 
Open innovation 
Increasing access to data for effective collaboration between businesses can allow 
companies to apply external ideas and technology to help find new solutions to their 
business challenges.  
 
Sharing data is essential to building effective collaborations that can deliver impact 
through an outsourced research and development process. Sharing operational data 
can help external organisations explore, analyse and use that data to provide 
insights, identify efficiency savings or demonstrate the value of new technologies. 
 
Data Pitch​, an EU-funded open innovation programme, was designed to support 
corporate and public sector organisations in sharing data with startups and small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to solve sector- and business-level challenges.  
44
 
 
Case study: Greiner Packaging International and OBUU 
 
Our open innovation case study focuses on one example in the Data Pitch 
programme, where Greiner Packaging International (GPI) shared data with 
logistics intelligence company OBUU to help monitor the resilience and 
efficiency of its supply chain. 
 
Read the case study 
Benefits of regulated sharing 
Increasing access to data to go beyond simple regulatory compliance can realise 
additional benefits. Regulatory compliance is necessary for companies to continue 
operating within their industry, but rather than an unwelcome obligation, the need to 
comply with regulation can be an opportunity to re-engage with customers and to 
drive innovation. 
 
Clear and visible support for data protection regulation can help ​build trust with 
consumers​. Embracing data sharing provisions in regulation specifically, for 
45
44
 Data Pitch (nd), https://datapitch.eu/  
45
 ​Open Access Government (2018), ‘The five key business benefits of GDPR’, 
https://www.openaccessgovernment.org/the-five-key-business-benefits-of-gdpr/44554/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   15 

 
example, the data portability right included in GDPR, can ​allow companies to explore 
new ways to attract and retain customers​. 
46
 
Regulation intended to increase market competition can create opportunities for 
existing providers, and not just new entrants. 
 
 
Case study: Barclays  
 
Our regulated data sharing case study describes how Barclays saw extra 
potential in the implementation of open banking regulations in the UK to 
provide new services, and build confidence with new and existing customers. 
 
Read the case study 
Supply chain optimisation 
Increasing access to data can help to optimise and improve a supply chain in a 
variety of ways:
,
 
4748
 
●Improve the speed and accuracy of product design and distribution ​by 
communicating key information on design specifications and logistics in real time. 
●Improve collaboration and trust among supply chain partners​ by sharing and 
adopting best practices and insights, while helping to reduce administrative costs. 
●Improve flexibility of operations down the supply chain ​by having the most up 
to date information on supply, demand, and external factors such as weather. 
●Improve overall cost management​ by providing more insight into inventory 
levels, price fluctuations, distribution networks, transport capacity and more. 
●Improve the transparency and provenance of the supply chain to ensure 
ethical operations​ by understanding the means of sourcing raw materials, 
building components, and transporting goods and materials. 
 
Increased access to real-time engineering data between organisations in a supply 
chain allows for much faster and more accurate product design, improving overall 
efficiency of delivery and contributing towards supply chain optimisation. 
 
 
Case study: Airbus  
 
Our supply chain optimisation case study explores how Airbus is sharing 
engineering data on its airplane concepts with supply chain partners in order 
to improve the efficiency and accuracy of their product design. 
46
 ​Open Data Institute (2017), ‘The EU General Data Protection Regulation: opportunities for grocery retail,, 
https://theodi.org/article/the-eu-general-data-protection-regulation-opportunities-for-grocery-retail/ 
47
 MobilityWork (2019), ‘Data sharing: What are the prospects for the supply chain?’, 
https://www.mobility-work.com/blog/data-sharing-supply-chain  
48
 McKinsey (2016), ‘Supply Chain 4.0 – the next-generation digital supply chain’, 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/supply-chain-40--the-next-generati
on-digital-supply-chain  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   16 

 
 
Read the case study 
Addressing sector challenges 
Increasing access to data can help in tackling sector-wide issues in a competitive 
industry that cannot be solved by a single organisation alone. Common challenges 
cover a range of issues, including a need to: 
 
●develop a collective response to common organisational issues, ​for example 
by improving health and safety in the workplace, developing skills or improving 
productivity 
●adapt to regulatory changes​ that, for example, might require operational 
changes to how businesses deliver services and share information 
●respond to social and environmental issues, such as climate change or adapting 
to the needs of an ageing population 
●build the market for a new sector,​ through collaboration, and creating shared 
resources, data and standards 
●test and apply new technologies ​that may change how services are delivered.  
 
Often these challenges will require collaboration across a sector in order to improve 
conditions for the industry as a whole.  
 
 
Case study: PassivSystems and Open Climate Fix 
 
In our addressing sector challenges case study we look at how PassivSystems 
and Open Climate Fix are working to address some of the challenges involved 
in “decarbonising” the UK energy sector and the shift to more renewable 
energy sources. 
 
Read the case study 
Building trust 
Increasing access to data can build trust among consumers, partners and 
governments. When companies have trusted brands, they are more likely to have 
better sales, and more opportunities for collaboration could become available. 
 
Businesses are increasingly collecting data not just about their direct business 
activities, but also their workforce, customers and environment. Reducing 
unnecessary data collection, and ensuring that data is used and shared in ethical 
ways, is already fundamental to building a trusted business. Sharing data, in ways 
that protect privacy and deliver value back to consumers, citizens and society, is also 
becoming increasingly important. 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   17 

 
Recommendations 
Our case studies demonstrate that sharing data can have direct benefits to individual 
businesses and sectors, as well as having broader social, environmental and 
economic impacts.  
 
We have shown that businesses increase access to data for a variety of reasons, 
relating to specific challenges and opportunities relevant to their business 
ecosystems. We have initially identified seven broad categories of value creation, but 
believe further analysis would identify additional benefits.  
 
To further explore this area, we have identified a number of recommendations, for 
individual businesses, industry bodies, as well as governments and regulators. 
Unlocking the full benefits of an open, trustworthy data ecosystem will require 
collaboration across a range of stakeholders. 
 
Businesses wanting to increase access to data that they hold should: 
 
●review our case studies​ to help develop understanding of the range of ways in 
which data sharing can benefit business 
●design internal skills and learning programmes to build an understanding of 
the value of data ​at all levels of the organisation 
●engage with internal stakeholders and potential partners ​to explore how key 
business challenges may be addressed through better use of data 
●participate in innovation programmes​ and accelerators, like ​Data Pitch​, or 
academic partnerships, as a means of getting facilitated support on sharing data 
that will help to address a business need or opportunity 
●review current approaches to sharing data, both internally and with suppliers and 
partners, to​ identify and explore new approaches to data sharing 
●develop a data strategy ​that will help to improve data governance and develop 
the internal data literacy required to make business-held data ‘shareable by 
default’  
49
●address internal concerns about the risks of data sharing, by ensuring there are 
appropriate policies that support ethical and legal sharing of data​. 
 
Businesses wanting to take a lead in their sector should: 
 
●document and share successes​ to build on these case studies and invite more 
opportunities to benefit from further data sharing  
●convene an ecosystem of partners, suppliers and customers ​to explore ways 
to increase access to data that will create business benefits, while respecting 
privacy and minimising harms. 
 
Professional associations, industry bodies and sector initiatives should: 
 
●convene businesses within their networks​ to help map out current and future 
data ecosystems that will unlock value for all participants 
●document and share insights ​around the benefits of increasing access to data 
around specific sector challenges 
49
 ​Thomson Reuters, Open Data Institute (2016), ‘Shareable by default: creating resilient data ecosystems’, 
https://theodi.org/article/white-paper-shareable-by-default-creating-resilient-data-ecosystems/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   18 

 
●develop codes of practice, guidance and training​ that will help businesses 
within a sector to share data, while respecting privacy and minimising harms. 
 
Governments and regulatory bodies should: 
 
●run innovation programmes​, like ​Data Pitch​, that will help to facilitate open 
innovation around sharing of data, to deliver value within specific sectors  
●fund and support work to scope and incubate new data access initiatives​, 
like data trusts, that will help organisations within a sector to share data in ways 
that will preserve privacy and increase trust 
●ensure that data shared as part of regulatory changes is made as open as 
possible​, to help develop open, trustworthy data ecosystems 
●build requirements for increasing access to data into funding agreements​ for 
activities that deliver on industrial strategies, such as the UK Sector Deals and 
Grand Challenges 
●support the development of legal frameworks and guidance​ that will help 
support ethical, legal and trustworthy sharing of data across a range of sectors. 
 
Organisations of all types within the engineering, manufacturing and construction 
sectors may also want to endorse our manifesto for increasing access to engineering 
data. 
50
  
50
 ​Open Data Institute (2019), ‘A manifesto for sharing engineering data’, 
https://theodi.org/article/engineering-data-for-the-public-good-a-manifesto/ 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   19 

 
Appendix: Methodology 
To explore the benefits that private sector organisations receive from increasing 
access to data that they hold, the ODI undertook the following activities across the 
discovery and alpha phases of our project. 
Discovery  
Desk research 
We started the project with desk research that mapped over 80 examples of private 
sector organisations that share data. From these examples, we analysed and 
grouped the various types of business value we observed.  
 
Our analysis explored different characteristics of the commercial environment of data 
sharing, such as: 
 
●Did the data sharing initiative seek to increase revenues, decrease costs, or both? 
●Was the data sharing focused on direct tangible benefits, such as measurable 
cost reductions, or indirect benefits such as reputation improvement? 
●What sector or industry did the businesses operate in and how was this linked to 
the data sharing initiative? 
●Did the competitiveness of the industry have an observable effect on the nature of 
data sharing? 
 
At the end of this initial desk research period, we reached out to businesses in our 
network to verify these business values. 
 
Interviews  
To validate the findings from the desk research, we conducted discovery interviews 
with seven companies from a variety of sectors, such as travel, finance and 
engineering. These interviews aimed to identify whether interviewees recognised 
these business values in their own work, and if there were any additional business 
values to consider. 
Alpha 
Commissioned reports 
We leveraged research commissioned for other programmes we have supported, 
such as the ​London Economics impact report for the ​Data Pitch​ open innovation 
51
programme, and the Frontier Economics impact report on open standards, which 
includes ​OpenActive. This informed some of the ecosystem benefit analysis in the 
52
report and case studies. 
 
 
 
51
 London Economics (2019), ‘Data Pitch evaluation’, 
https://datapitch.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/London-Economics-Data-Pitch-evalu
ation-FINAL-PDF.pdf  
52
 OpenActive (nd), ‘Helping physical activity reach everyone’, https://www.openactive.io/  
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   20 

 
Interviews 
We conducted additional interviews with 10 stakeholders from a range of companies 
who exhibited the realisation of the business values that we had identified in the 
discovery phase. The interviews aimed to understand the following: 
 
●The data sharing process itself, including the technologies and actors involved. 
●The purpose of sharing data from the organisation’s own perspective. 
●The financial and non-financial benefits that the organisation has seen so far, or 
expects to see. 
●The wider ecosystem implications of the data sharing initiative, including what 
other organisations are involved or impacted, and the benefits they receive. 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2020 / ReportSharing data to create value in the private sector   21 