

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototyping with open sports data (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/#1523282029352-95606351-48c31/10
Professional surfers carrying their surfboards while going to the sea, professional surfers in black
diving suits ready to surf walk to the ocean, close up of surfboard with surfer on background
Prototyping with open sports data (report)
Mon Apr 9, 2018
Share
Built environment and housing Health and physical activity Cities
Three prototypes exploring the potential of local, open data to support
communities and enhance the experience of peer-to-peer accommodation
platforms
Olivier Thereaux
Former ODI staff member: Head of Research and Development
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototyping with open sports data (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/#1523282029352-95606351-48c32/10
For the past few months, as one of our innovation programme projects, we have
been exploring the role of data in understanding and measuring the impact of – and
informing the debate about – the emerging peer-to-peer accommodation sector.
Most of the exploration into the data itself focused on data about the sector and
monitoring its various impacts on local areas, but we also wanted to look at it from
the other side of the equation: could data, especially open data – covering other
sectors and areas of society – benefit both communities and actors within the peer-
to-peer accommodation sector?
By asking this question, we are working to understand how data can support a
better experience for both peer-to-peer accommodation sector users and for the
communities they visit. We think that by working with data about local communities
and local businesses, peer-to-peer accommodation platforms can support and
engage with local communities and create mutual economic opportunities. We have
looked at the specific example of peer-to-peer accommodation platforms working
with data about physical activities, however, there are other data types that could
be connected. These range from local public services and community activities to
shops and cinemas. There are also different platforms and services which could
create more opportunities and a richer environment for innovation, social and
economic value.
Early in the project, our team thought we should explore how existing open data – a
lot of which is inherently about places – could be used by platforms to enrich the
experience of peer-to-peer accommodation. One of our motivations was to address
the fear we were hearing from users and local authorities that communities are
being impacted negatively by peer-to-peer accommodation platforms, or the people
brought into their neighbourhoods through these platforms. These fears included
noise pollution, dangerous or careless behavior, disruption of local communities
and displacement of inhabitants, among others. We wondered if this effect could be
minimized by making platform users more aware of their surroundings, which in
turn would help them bolster the local economy, participate more in local life and
help create a more positive environment.
Stewardship v integration
Unlike data gathered and maintained directly by peer-to-peer platforms about the
neighbourhoods in which they offer accommodation, we started to realise that
integrating with third party data has its challenges as well as advantages, and
requires new approaches. Integrating open data maintained by third parties into
peer-to-peer platforms would mean that different platforms could access, use, and
even contribute to any given locally focused dataset in completely different ways.
And so we set out to develop several prototypes around a single dataset to explore
this hypothesis.
It is worth highlighting that these same benefits and challenges might apply to any
service integrating with any open data, and so these prototypes will prove useful to
surface those issues for other readers, regardless of sector.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototyping with open sports data (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/#1523282029352-95606351-48c33/10
Augmenting the experience with physical activity data
Based on user interviews, we considered a number of sources of data that could be
considered useful in tailoring trips to individual needs, including data about bus
stops and times, local restaurants, independent shops, local event venues and
things to do, as well as when an area is busy versus when it is not. There might
also be an interest in data about the area, for example census or economic data, or
crime statistics. Some of this data already exists as open data in certain cities and
councils, but it probably hasn’t been collected in a standardised, usable way across
the different regions of the country.
Instead, we focused on physical activity data, partly because we had seen
anecdotal interest for the mixing of the two, as illustrated in this Twitter exchange:
Physical activity data is inherently local and becoming broadly available across
geographies. Unlike practical or transactional data – such as waste collection or the
location of bus stop – data about sports and activities lends itself well to being used
creatively by peer-to-peer accommodation platforms in ways that could open up
opportunities for innovative added value to their services. This gives us a richer
variety of uses for our prototypes than if we had worked with other open data
sources such as bin collection or parking data.
Finding and choosing the most useful dataset
At the ODI we have been leading a sector programme on physical activity data
called OpenActive, through which a lot of open data on activity opportunities

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototyping with open sports data (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/#1523282029352-95606351-48c34/10
(classes, outings, etc) are being published in a decentralised way by organisations
and communities, using a standard we helped develop. For this set of prototypes,
however, we were more interested in the location of facilities for sport and physical
activities than in the activity opportunities themselves. For the purpose of our
prototypes, the Active Places Power open dataset published by Sport England
 seemed most appropriate: with its focus on facilities, the Active Places Power set
includes more consistent data about geographical location of the facilities than in
the OpenActive datasets, where precise latitude and longitude information were
made optional to make publishing more straightforward.
The Active Places Power dataset is focused on facilities around the UK and is
managed and produced by Sport England as part of their work to assess those
facilities, and is a readily available dataset for exploring the questions we set out in
this report. However, there is a much wider set of locations where physical activities
take place, such as parks and public spaces. Over time, we hope that OpenActive
datasets will help reveal a broader set of locations outside sports facilities, and
grow to include identifiers for those places.  
Three prototypes
We ended up developing three distinct prototypes, each interacting and integrating
with the same dataset:
1. How might a peer-to-peer accommodation platform integrate with an open
dataset to offer a richer experience, while controlling risks of using data they do
not directly gather or maintain?
2. How might a peer-to-peer accommodation platform use this same dataset with
an approach that is more locally focussed, more actively engaged with the
local community and responsive to local feedback?
3. How might a more specialised peer-to-peer accommodation platform curate
the same dataset, to add value beyond the display of information, but also as a
vector for business development and partnership building – for example, to
broker services between sports facilities and its accommodation seekers?
Prototype one: Integrating with open, local data
Prototype two: Integrated with the local data ecosystem
Prototype three: Finding value in and adding value to data
Conclusion
In this report we explored, through practical prototyping, how peer-to-peer
accommodation platforms could use, integrate with and curate available open data
sources to enhance the experience they offer their users. While we focussed on the

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototyping with open sports data (report) – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/prototyping-with-open-sports-data-report/#1523282029352-95606351-48c35/10
peer-to-peer accommodation sector in this instance, we would like to point out that
the same challenges and benefits would apply to any service wanting to integrate
with open data, regardless of sector.
View the conclusion
Related
Recent related activities
We worked with Sport England to develop OpenActive – a community-led data access
initiative to get more people active using open data
BLOG, CASE STUDY 24/08/2022
Helping the physical activity sector use open data to get more people active
DATA PUBLISHING AND USE, HEALTH AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, INNOVATION
CANALSIDECHATMEMBERSEVENTTALK

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55901/7
Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open,
local data
Share
The platform “Far.far.from.home.com” adds value to their original offer by being
more than a simple peer-to-peer property broker. They are a platform that would
like their users to get the best experience possible out of the available rentals, and
through their own research they have discovered that users want to take part in
local community life and activities. In order to do that, they’ve decided to highlight
local sports and activity centres.  
The popular, worldwide platform “Far.far.from.home.com” is constantly striving to
add value to their original offer by being more than a simple peer-to-peer property
broker. They are a platform that would like their users to get the best experience
possible out of the available rentals, and through their own research they have
discovered that users want to take part in local community life and activities.
In order to do that, they’ve decided to highlight local sports and activity centres.  
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55902/7
This data is made available by Sport England as a publicly available dataset. In this
case the data is made available as a complete data file. Without a searchable API
provided by Sport England anyone who wants to search the data needs to
download the datafile and store it in a local database. For the latest corrections and
updates to the data, the platform can call an API; the corrections and updates are
merged with the platform’s local database.
The data for each site offering physical activities contains the following and more:
Location information such as address and postcode for searching, and
latitude/longitude for placing on a map
Access information such as provision of disabled parking, toilets and changing
facilities

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55903/7
A list and details of facilities such as gyms, pools, football pitches, tennis
courts and many more facility types
The user experience
Each property has a details page that includes a ‘Nearby’ section. The property
would be highlighted on a map, along with shops, bars, restaurants, and sports
centres.
The map would be interactive, with users able to click on each ‘pin’ to open a panel
of detailed information about the facilities, taken directly from the dataset.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55904/7
Responsibility for data quality and impact on user experience
At this point the platform might want to consider who – from the user’s point of view
– is considered liable or responsible for the accuracy of the data.
In the case of a large platform with millions of users worldwide, the possibility of
adopting and using open data can feel like it carries a significant risk. Incorrect data
shown as information on the platform could lead to some unpleasant situations:
what if the address for a facility has changed, and the platform recommends its
users go jogging in what is now a toxic waste plant? As they consider the potential
value of this dataset and how it might benefit users, the platform’s lawyers and
product managers will undoubtedly consider these potential outcomes, affecting
how they might decide to mitigate risks.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55905/7
The first mitigation strategy is for the platform to clearly state the provenance of the
data. Doing this right can be a challenge: in the typically information-rich interfaces
of online platforms, it can be hard to get people to notice, let alone understand, that
some information comes from, and is under the control of, a third party. But not only
is stating provenance a fair way for the platform to give credit to the source of the
open data, it can, when done right, also help direct comments to the right channels
should the users of the platform notice missing or incorrect data. This is why, for
example, the BBC visibly credits the source of information when integrating open
content and open data in their online services.
Demonstrating provenance does not fully address the concern that the platform
may be showing incorrect or otherwise problematic information based on their
integration of this open data.
Here the platform has a choice of mechanisms to adopt. Assuming that the platform
adds an interface for its users to report incorrect information:
They could simply hide incorrect data to minimise the impact on others, and
the effect on their reputation for quality
They could inform the user that the data is managed by someone else and
redirect them to the stewards of the data, in anticipation of receiving a
correction via the Sport England API at a later point. In effect this conveys that
they are exempting themselves from liability and responsibility
They could correct their local copy of the data, or update it from the source,
where it might have already been fixed
They could take it upon themselves to make sure the data is fixed at the
source, assuming the source has feedback mechanisms to support this. We
explore this in prototype two
They can also provide a mechanism for integrating corrections supplied to
them back into the original data source, thereby connecting the user and the
third party
Adding contextual information can help to build trust and create transparency. This
includes indicating when the data was last updated, and using high quality sources,
such as those published at source by organisations like Sport England, or by
checking the provenance of data supplied by intermediaries.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55906/7
In this example, Far.far.from.home has opted for a mix of the above: the user can
‘Report information as incorrect’, and the platform automatically hides that
particular location while they make efforts to rectify the mistake, potentially at
source. This way other users will not see the incorrect information and the platform
won’t get in trouble for displaying inaccurate data to users. Platforms might also
have policies in place to avoid abuse between competitors, for example where a
company repeatedly flags a competitor’s location as incorrect in an attempt to gain
more business for themselves.
What happens next, as illustrated here, is unknown to the user: they do not know if
the feedback is sent to a member of platform staff to check, passed on to the third
party to check, or permanently deleted on Far.far.from.home’s database. Is the user
expected to notify the third party themselves if they wish the data to be accurate for
future users, or users of other platforms? In the second prototype (detailed below),
we will explore a different approach.
Prototype one walkthrough:  https://14dim6.axshare.com/#c2  
Summary
Benefits of integrating third party data
Third parties have specialist knowledge and understand sophisticated
domains, beyond accommodation – the peer-to-peer platform can concentrate
on what they do best while gaining value from the third party’s expertise and
services
The user has access to information that they wouldn’t see or know about in
other circumstances, for relatively little effort on the part of the platform
Integrating data enhances the visibility and utility of that data to end users,
giving an incentive to data stewards to publish more and keep what they

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype one: a global platform integrating with open, local data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55907/7
      
Creative Commons Licence
Open Data Institute, 5th Floor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9AG
Privacy policy Contact us
publish up to date, which in turn makes it more useful and usable for both the
platform and others
Challenges to integrating third-party data
Platforms will need to synchronise with open data on a regular basis to keep
up to date and provide the ability to search quickly
The data is not managed by the platform, leaving the possibility of presenting
errors and inconsistencies for which the platform may appear liable.
Furthermore, the platforms can’t directly change the source data in the case of
mistakes and may encounter difficulties keeping locally corrected data both
correct and synchronised with the original source
Different third parties make their data available in different ways, using different
formats and API conventions. The platform will need to take different technical
approaches depending on the data provider
Without providers adhering to standards, it would be difficult to combine data.
For example, different providers may use different identifiers for locations, or
use different data models to describe the same domains
Platforms have no control over when and how the third party might change the
format or availability of data that they rely on, but their customers might come
to rely on and expect that data to be present. The platform will need to have
contingencies in place for unexpected interruptions to the provision of data, or
its gradual obsolescence if the third party stops investing in its maintenance
We have attempted to explore the challenges of feedback and corrections in our
second prototype.
Go back to main pageView prototype two

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype two: a platform integrated with the local data ecosystem – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55961/4
Prototype two: a platform integrated with the local data
ecosystem
Share
This platform enables users to become part of the local data ecosystem for
everyone’s benefit: the users can input their own local knowledge, the platforms
benefit from more accurate information, and the open data becomes more
accurate and useful for everyone.
What distinguishes this from the first prototype is that the platform considers itself
more integrated in the local data ecosystem. We think this is more likely if either the
platform has a more local focus and has built good relationships with the people
who provide the data, or if there were good data communication standards and a
technological process in place to manage amendments.
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype two: a platform integrated with the local data ecosystem – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55962/4
This way the platform and users become part of the local data ecosystem for
everyone’s benefit: the users can input their own local knowledge, the platforms
benefit from more accurate information, and the open data becomes more accurate
and useful for everyone.
The user experience is much the same, but in this case when the user finds an
error, the platform provides an interface to enable the data to be corrected, thereby
effectively  crowdsourcing quality data.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype two: a platform integrated with the local data ecosystem – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55963/4
This way the correction is captured at source, in the moment, and sent directly to
the third party: the platform acts as a bridge between the user and data providers.
The platform can choose how to track the integration of the correction and
communicate it to the user.

27/10/2022, 14:47Prototype two: a platform integrated with the local data ecosystem – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=55964/4
Prototype two walkthrough: https://t0v9qj.axshare.com/#c=2
Summary
Benefits of feeding back corrections
Develops relationships between data providers and platforms, encouraging
dialogue and creating an incentive for the data provider to keep providing
quality data
By feeding corrections back, the platform ensures that the data at the source
remains usable in the long run. The alternatives are much less desirable.
Simply hiding incorrect data misses the opportunity of it being corrected, and
correcting only the data in the local copy held by the platform means that the
two sets will diverge over time. This means that the platform cannot benefit
from updates from the source, and has to maintain a parallel, but flawed,
version of the dataset forever.
Multi-way conversations lead to convergence on standards and integration,
which benefits the data ecosystem as a whole and can encourage further
innovation by other platforms
Both the platform and users are involved in a transparent way, increasing
understanding of data’s role in delivering a service
Shared responsibility for data quality reduces the costs involved for any single
party in keeping data up to date and relevant
Challenges to feeding back corrections
Integrating with third parties necessitates building additional interfaces
between the platform and third party data providers, and this takes additional
resources
The ability to feedback corrections requires data providers to supply feedback
interfaces. This is likely to make additional work for them and may only be
worthwhile if useful and accurate corrections are likely to be provided through
the platforms
Feedback may take time to be integrated into the third party data but users
may expect changes they suggest to be displayed immediately. Platforms may
need to amend their local copy of the data while waiting for the correction to
work its way through into the original
In some data ecosystems, there may be intermediaries between the platform
and the original data source. To feedback corrections, feedback interfaces
would have to be created at every step of the data value chain
Back to prototype oneBack to main pagePrototype three

27/10/2022, 14:48Prototype three: finding value in and adding value to data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56061/4
Prototype three: finding value in and adding value to data
Share
This prototype explores how a peer-to-peer accommodation platform called The
Best Holidays adds further value on top of an open dataset by curating it and
augmenting it for their own users.
Our third prototype explores how a peer-to-peer accommodation platform called
The Best Holidays adds further value on top of an open dataset by curating it and
augmenting it for their own users.
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:48Prototype three: finding value in and adding value to data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56062/4
The Best Holidays caters to families. Their business focus is to highlight
accommodation in quieter areas away from busy roads, or whose owners have
considered issues such as storage for buggies, space for travel cots and safety
features such as stair gates. Another important consideration for families are
suitable activities, such as alternative plans for rainy days.
Looking again to the Sport England dataset, The Best Holidays can identify local
sports facilities that would suit a family. For example, swimming pools that are
defined as  ‘Leisure pools’, which are described in the accompanying API
documentation as “primarily designed for informal recreational swimming and may
include flumes, slides, beach areas, water jets, and wave machines”. They can also
identify ‘Learner/Teaching/Training’ pools, suitable for younger children.

27/10/2022, 14:48Prototype three: finding value in and adding value to data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56063/4
The Best Holidays adds their own unique value to an open dataset by selecting
only data that is relevant to their business model, and presenting it in a way that
makes best sense to their own users.
In this example, besides showing the Sport England dataset information, they have
shown information relevant to parents that would benefit the user, such as proximity
to child-friendly restaurants, neighborhood quietness, and closeness to parks and
museums.
This data is obtained by cross-referencing property listings with points of interest in
OpenStreetMap (parks, restaurants, museums, soft play areas, etc) and integrating
that with property listings.

27/10/2022, 14:48Prototype three: finding value in and adding value to data – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56064/4
Finding opportunities in data
By exploring data that is collected and managed by a third party who knows a
domain well, it is possible to discover opportunities and connections that are unique
to The Best Holidays without incurring the cost of data collection. In other words,
the data facilitates innovation, business development and partnership building, and
strengthens relationships in the communities in which The Best Holidays operates.
The Best Holidays approaches those sites identified as providing family-friendly
facilities or activities and agrees special discount or package deals. This serves the
double purpose of bringing business to the sports facilities and making the
accommodation platform more attractive to families.
The prototype presents this concept from the user perspective. The Best Holidays
has already used the dataset to identify partner facilities, and has agreed special
package deals for the families using this family-friendly accommodation platform.
These deals are offered to the user through the website.
Prototype three walkthrough: https://qm2t2r.axshare.com/#c=2
Summary
Benefits of showing curated information
Gives platform a competitive advantage: they can provide services that are
more enriched with relevant information than other platforms
Allows platforms to create more targeted, distinct services
Improves services for end users
Reduces the cost and risks of adopting a dataset maintained by a third party –
through curation, less of the data gets displayed, and the likelihood that the

27/10/2022, 14:48Conclusion and recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56101/4
Conclusion and recommendations
Share
In this report we explored, through practical prototyping, how peer-to-peer
accommodation platforms could use, integrate with and curate available open data
sources to enhance the experience they offer their users.
In this report we explored, through practical prototyping, how peer-to-peer
accommodation platforms could use, integrate with and curate available open data
sources to enhance the experience they offer their users.
While we focussed on the peer-to-peer accommodation sector in this instance, we
would like to point out that the same challenges and benefits would apply to any
service wanting to integrate with open data, regardless of sector.
The prototypes illustrate how this integration can be achieved, at least technically,
in a very short amount of time. It also helps us illustrate some of the challenges
such an integration would create.
On the one hand, useful local data exists and much is available as open data for
anyone to access, use and share.
But there are costs. Using open data requires an investment of developer time to
deal with the incoming third party data, particularly when working to integrate a lot
of different third party sources that have not been built according to the same
standards and use different APIs.
Additional work is needed to integrate feedback loops between data providers and
platform users. They may not need to collect or curate the data themselves, but
integrating other datasets could divert platforms from their core functionality and
require them to become knowledgeable in domains they might not be comfortable
with or benefit from right away.
However, for some platforms, using data to invest in more targeted business
models could give them the edge over bigger platforms. It could help them find and
cater to niche users and create a loyal audience that can rely on their richer offer.
Curation of information and delivering to targeted audiences could be a way to
overcome competition in the long term and change the peer-to-peer landscape over
time.
If done well, displaying and curating data may alleviate some fears we’ve heard
concerning  peer-to-peer platforms not taking into account local communities or
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

27/10/2022, 14:48Conclusion and recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56102/4
creating a bubble of tourism in certain areas. While our prototypes focused on
sports and physical activity data, interacting with other local council data (regarding
bins, crime statistics and noise statistics for example) and local area data (local
restaurants, artisans, small shops, neighborhood activities, etc.) could help with
those issues.
Drawing data from collaborative platforms like Open Street Maps could give local
businesses the opportunity to ensure they have more control over the data they
show, and that that information is up to date. Local councils and business
information districts could offer support to do this, while other services provide
mechanisms for community groups to provide data, such as the accessible
locations data provided and crowdsourced through Wheelmap.
However, a greater variety of data sources brings challenges which place a heavy
burden on platforms that want to make use of this data, such as:
handling multiple data formats and API approaches
integrating data that uses different identifiers
dealing with differences in responses to corrections and updates
Our prototypes used only open data and therefore did not have to contend with the
additional compliance challenges that would arise if different datasets were made
available under different terms and conditions. The technical challenges are hard
enough.
Intermediaries can thrive in such a complex environment, offering pre-cleansed,
standardised, integrated and reliable data, and adding sufficient value to data that
is provided for free at source that services further up the data value chain are
prepared to pay for it.
From this prototyping exercise, we can highlight a number of recommendations for
data publishers, user-facing services and intermediaries:
Data publishers:
Make it easy for people who use your data to get in touch with you and talk
about their plans – this will help you ensure the data is being provided in a
useful way and give you good examples of the benefits of the investment you
have made
Use open data certificates to indicate that data is being published openly and
in a way which follows best practice guidance
Use common open standards for data and identifiers to make it easier for data
users to use the data you provide
Include clear licences and provide clear guidance on how to attribute data that
you provide, so that people who view it on other platforms can understand its
provenance
Provide both data dumps to initialise local databases and form the basis of
analysesandfeedsofupdatesandcorrectionstoenabledatauserstokeep

27/10/2022, 14:48Conclusion and recommendations – The ODI
https://theodi.org/?page_id=56103/4
analyses, and feeds of updates and corrections to enable data users to keep
local copies up to date
Building and maintaining robust, searchable APIs comes with a cost. Consider
business models that offer differing levels of support and availability. You may
for instance provide an API for exploration only, and/or a fully supported API
with expectations of reliability as a commercial service
Provide APIs that enable tools to provide corrections to the data you make
available, and provide clear indications of the process involved in these
corrections showing up in that data
User-facing services:
There are many open data sources that could be integrated into your service –
talking to the providers of that data may help you assess its suitability and
create a mutually beneficial relationship
Provide attribution back to the data you integrate into your services. Design
interfaces in collaboration with users that help them understand who is
responsible for the accuracy of the data you display
Provide mechanisms to enable people to provide corrections to data. Design
interfaces in collaboration with users that help to set their expectations about
how these corrections are dealt with and when they might surface.
Intermediaries:
Ensure that it’s possible for the users of your service to trace the provenance
of the data you provide back to its original source, so that they can indicate it to
their users
Help drive improvements to the upstream dataset by directing people to
contribute and correct the data at source. If this is not possible, provide a
mechanism to correct a local version of the dataset and engage with upstream
publishers to clarify feedback mechanisms and make them automated if
possible
Directly engage with editing and correcting collaborative datasets. For
example, Transport for London are helping improve OpenStreetMap by
contributing detailed layouts of tube stations
This prototyping exercise allowed us to think about a number of questions, for
which the answers will often depend on the goals, business models and
specificities of platforms aiming to integrate local open data in their products. We
hope that it helped highlight the existence of a number of quality open datasets
waiting to be used, and pointed those aiming use them in the right direction.
GET IN TOUCH TO DISCUSS OUR RESEARCH WITH US
Get in touch