

July 2021
Review of the UK business to business data 
assurance market
Final report

2frontier economics
ODI Foreword
Tocreateaworldwheredataworksforeveryone,andunlockvaluefortheUKeconomy,weneedtrustworthydatatoflowinwell-governed
waysaroundthedataecosystem.Datasharingisrestrictedwhengovernmentsandcompaniesthatcouldshareorreusedataareunableto
assessthetrustworthinessofdatasetsorotherorganisations.Thiscanreducetheirwillingnesstoprovideaccesstodatatheystewardandto
usedatafromthirdparties,leadingtomissedopportunitiesfortheuseofdataandduplicateddatacollectioneffort.
TheroleoftrustandassuranceinincreasingdataflowsisanareathathasbeenatthecentreofODIworkforanumberofyears.In2019we
commissionedpublicinnovationconsultancy,OxfordInsights,toundertakeexploratoryworkaroundcertificationsfordatatrusts.Thisexamined
whatitwouldmeantogiveanorganisationstewardingdataonbehalfofothersanofficialstamporsealofapproval.Webuiltonthisthrough
worktoevaluatetheeconomicimpactoftrustindataecosystemsandfoundthattrust,ethicsandopennessarounddatadirectlylinkto
increaseddataflowsandvaluecreation,upto2.5%ofGDP.Inparallelweresearchedtheroleofcertificationandauditinbuildingtrustand
trustworthinessindataanddatapractices.Wefoundthattrustandtrustworthinessarehighlycontextdependentandthatthird-party
assessmentsareuseful,butonlytoadegreeandwithincertaincontexts.
Dataassuranceactivitieshavearoletoplaybyhelpingorganisationsassess,buildanddemonstratebothtrustinandthetrustworthinessof
dataanddatapractices.Organisationsandindividualsthataccess,useandsharedataneedtoprovideassurance,orbeconfident,thatdatais
fitforpurposeandtrustworthyforuse,andthatthepurposesofdatacollectionareethicalandequitable.Policymakersandorganisationsthat
offerdataassuranceservicesproductsandservicesneedtounderstandwheretheycanbestsupporttrustworthydatasharing.Identifying
wheretheycanaddvaluerequiresanunderstandingofthecurrentmarketforUKdataassurance;includingwherethemarketisflooded,and
areaswheretherearegaps.
WearethereforedelightedtointroducethisworkbyeconomicsconsultancyFrontierEconomics,commissionedaspartofawiderprogramme
ofworkondataassurance,aimedatimprovingthedatapracticesoforganisationssothattheycanbuildandmanageadequatedata
infrastructureanddatause,whichtookonexplorationofthistopic.
Thisresearchrevealsapotentiallysignificantmarketopportunityfororganisationsthatareconcernedwithincreasingtrustindataanddata
practices.Weexpecttoseehighgrowthinyearstocome,asmoreorganisationsgrapplewithdemandtobuildconfidencewithcustomers,
shareholdersandthepublic.Aswe’verecentlyhighlightedinourresponsetothegovernment’sconsultationonrestoringtrustinauditand
corporategovernance,dataassurancepracticesareattheheartofbuildingconfidenceinthewaythatUKcompaniesarerunandscrutinised.
AttheODI,we’relookingforwardtoworkingwiththemarkettodeveloppractices,productsandservicesinthisincreasinglysignificantarea.
DeborahYates,ProgrammeLead-DataAssurance

3frontier economics
Contents
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results32
5.Conclusion64
6.References67
7.Annex70

4frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

5frontier economics
Data assurance is about building confidence in dataand the processes 
that support creation, storage and usage of that data
Data 
interlinking
Data sharing/ 
publishing
Data 
harmonisation
Data collection/ 
sourcing
Data 
exploitation
Data curation
Source: adapted from Attard et al. (2016) and Attard et al. (2017) 
Datavaluechain
Assurance is about 
building confidence 
and demonstrating 
trustworthiness to 
others via evidence
Data assurance services can enable organisations to: 
▪understand risks and opportunities in the data they create and share 
themselves; 
▪trust the data they access and reuse from third parties
▪share data with others who they are confident will avoid harmful impacts while 
using it.
Data assurance can be a process that organisations undertake on an ongoing basis. 
These processes may occur continuously in real time or be centred around certain 
events such as data audits.
Data assurance can play a role at multiple stages of the data value chain from verification of data collection practices  to 
building trust which facilitates more appropriate data curation 

6frontier economics
Frontier and glass.ai were commissioned to review the UK data 
assurance market
Desk review
Step 1
Gather 
quantitative data
Step 2
Analyse 
quantitative data 
Step 3
Reporting
Step 4
We have developed a four stage methodology featuring an innovative form of data collection and analysis: 
We addressed four 
research questions
What is the size of the 
market?
How mature is the 
market?
What types of firms are active in 
this market and where are they 
based?
What are the types of products 
and services offered by the 
firms?
1
2
3
4

7frontier economics
We have four key takeaways from our work
SIZE OF MARKET
MATURITY OF 
MARKET
TYPES OF FIRMS AND 
LOCATIONS
TYPES OF PRODUCTS 
AND SERVICES
There is a considerable 
amount of economic 
activity in the data 
assurance space in the 
UK. 
Employment in firms 
offering data assurance 
firms is spread across a 
wide number of firms of 
different sizes
A range of data 
assurance products and 
services are available. 
These offerings may be 
aimed at different types 
of users with different 
needs. Several keywords 
did not match against 
any firms. This could 
provide tentative 
evidence of gaps in the 
market.
The majority of firms we 
identified who provide 
data assurance services 
were incorporated in the 
last 10 years. 
The average birth rate 
amongst data assurance 
firms is almost 12% per 
annum. 
In keeping with other 
emerging sectors, it is 
hard to identify a specific 
data assurance market. 
Data assurance activities 
may in several cases 
have become part of the 
offer of firms active 
across different traditional 
sectors

8frontier economics
Most firms engaged in data assurance activities have fewer than 10 
employees
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0-1
employees
2-10
employees
11-50
employees
51-200
employees
201-500
employees
501-1,000
employees
1,001-5,000
employees
5,001-10,000
employees
10,001+
employees
Number of firms
▪56% of the firms who are engaged in data assurance activities had 10 or fewer employees and 87% have 
fewer than 50 employees. We identified seven firms who each employ over 10,000 staff (these are primarily 
large audit / accounting firms). The majority of these employees in the largest firms will not be directly 
involved in data assurance activities.  
The majority of identified firms have a relatively small number of employees each
Breakdownofdataassurancefirmsbyemployeesizeband
In total, we identified 890 firms engaged in data assurance activities (for simplicity we refer to these as “data 
assurance firms” throughout, even though in some cases their commercial activity will not be entirely data 
assurance related). We have conservatively estimated that approximately 30,000 staff are involved in the 
delivery of data assurance activities. This assumes that only a small proportion of total employment in the 
largest firms we identified is related to data assurance. 
SIZE OF MARKET
There is a considerable 
amount of economic 
activity in the data 
assurance space in the 
UK. Employment in firms 
offering data assurance 
is spread across a wide 
number of firms of 
different sizes
KEY TAKEAWAY
Note: The total employment figure is based on the number of employees who have listed themselves as an employee of a firm on LinkedIn. We have 
assumed that only 1% of employees in firms with >1000 employees are engaged in data assurance activities.  The firm level employment band data is a 
separate variable. These two separate measures of employment will be highly correlated but will not always be completely consistent. 
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

9frontier economics
The market is growing at a rate which is broadly consistent with the 
wider economy
▪The average birth rate amongst data assurance firms is 11.7% per annum. 
▪In total 58% of the data assurance firms that we identified were incorporated in the last ten years and 90% 
were incorporated after 2000. 
Between 2014-2020 an average of 44 new firms entered the data assurance market each year
MATURITY OF 
MARKET
The majority of firms we 
identified who provide data 
assurance services were 
incorporated in the last 10 
years. 
KEY TAKEAWAY
Marketentryovertime
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1977198519881990199219941996199820002002200420062008201020122014201620182020
No. of new entrants

10frontier economics
Firms who engage in data assurance activities operate across a range 
of traditional sectors
▪Usingtheglass.aiclassificationsystem(seeAnnexforfullbreakdown)wefoundthemostcommonsectors
includedInformationTechnologyandServices,Consulting,ComputerSoftware,andComputerNetworking
andSecurity.Thisillustratesthewiderangeofsectorsthatdataassurancecompaniesareactivein.Italso
reinforcesthepointthatwecannotisolatedataassuranceactivitieswithinasingletraditionalsector.
Data assurance firms specialise in a variety of technology, finance and professional service areas 
TYPES OF FIRMS 
AND LOCATIONS
In keeping with other 
emerging sectors, it is 
hard to identify a 
specific data assurance 
market. Data assurance 
activities may in several 
cases have become 
part of the offer of firms 
active across different 
traditional sectors
KEY TAKEAWAY
Toptenglass.aisub-sectors:percentages
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

11frontier economics
Firms engaging in data assurance activities are overrepresented in 
London relative to share of all businesses in the region. 
TYPES OF FIRMS 
AND LOCATIONS
Firms engaged in data 
assurance activities are 
more common in certain 
geographic areas than 
others. There is a clear 
clustering of firms around 
London and the South 
East. There are pockets of 
data assurance activity in 
all regions but this is 
limited to urban centres 
generally. 
KEY TAKEAWAY
GeographicdistributionofUKfirmsengagedindata
assuranceactivities
Weseethatthereisaclearclustering
offirmsaroundurbancentres
especiallyaroundLondonwhich
contains40%ofthefirmsinour
sample.Thisismorethantwicethe
proportionofallUKfirmswhoare
basedinLondon
Firms engaged in data assurance 
activities are based in clusters 
across the UK
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

12frontier economics
Data management and data governance were the two most identified 
search terms
▪Overall52ofour75searchtermsidentifiedatleastonefirmthatwasincludedinourfinallist.48%ofthe
firmsweidentifiedwerelinkedtooneofthetop5mostfrequenttopics.
▪Only8outofthe890firmsidentifiedwerelinkedwiththespecificsearchterm‘dataassurance’.
Most of the data assurance firms are identified through a subset of topic matches
TYPES OF 
PRODUCTS AND 
SERVICES
A range of data 
assurance products and 
services are available. 
These offerings may be 
aimed at different types 
of users who have 
different needs. Several 
search terms did not 
match against any firms. 
This could provide 
tentative evidence of 
gaps in the market.
KEY TAKEAWAY
Ourdeep-diveintolargeaccountingfirms’dataassuranceofferingsrevealedanumberofservice
offeringcategories:
Outcome focused
Process focused
Category of offering / 
capability 
Improving data 
governance
Data privacy 
& security
Data 
compliance
Increasing 
data quality
Sharing 
data
Making best 
use of data

13frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

14frontier economics
The Open Data Institutehave commissioned Frontier to examine the UK 
market for business-to-business data assurance services
The mission of the 
Open Data Institute 
(ODI) is to work with 
companies and 
governments to build 
an open, trustworthy 
data ecosystem
▪ODIarelookingintotheroleofdataassurance.ODIhaspreviouslyworkedwithcompanies
andgovernmentstobothhelpthemassuredata,andbeassuredbythequalityofthedata
providedbyothers
▪Thisforthcomingprogrammeofworkbuildsonpreviousworkcarriedoutandcommissioned
bytheODI.TheODIhascarriedoutextensiveresearchintohowdataiscollected,managed
andused.PreviousODIresearchhasbeenfocusedonexploringwhichmechanismsarelikely
tohavethemostimpactinimprovingtrustbetweenorganisationsarounddata.Someofthe
ODIworkinthisareainvestigates:
the levers through which trust in data ecosystems can be enhanced;
the ways in which organisations can demonstrate trustworthiness when sharing data; and
the value of sharing data to build trust and trustworthiness.
The ODI have started a programme of research on data assurance
Scope of this 
report
Frontier and glass.ai were asked to carry out:
“a market review to improve understanding of the current UK data 
assurance market”
▪Our work helps inform decisions on where the ODI and other actors 
can best support adoption products that will lead to greater trust and 
data sharing. The work will also serve as a benchmark for later years.

15frontier economics
We have focused on four specific research questions throughout our 
work
What is the size of 
market?
▪How many firms are active in this space currently in the UK?
▪What is the size distribution of firms currently active in this market in terms of revenue and number of 
employees?
▪What is the aggregate size of this market in terms of employees and revenue?
How mature is the 
market?
▪What is the distribution of incorporation dates amongst included firms?
▪How do recent market joiners compare to more established firms?
In what sectors and 
areas are firms based?
▪Across what sectors of the economy are data assurance firms most often categorised?
▪Wherein the UK do data assurance firms have their HQs?
What are the types of 
products and services 
offered?
▪What types of offering exist in the market?
▪What are the typical business models adopted by data assurance firms?

16frontier economics
Data assurance services can help to build confidence in data and data 
practices
Assurance is about 
building confidence 
and demonstrating 
trustworthiness to 
others via evidence.
For the purposes of this work we are defining data assurance as the process by which:
“organisations assess, and demonstrate trustworthiness in their own data and data 
practices as well as the data and data practices of others.This in turn can help build 
trust and confidence in data ecosystems.” 
Organisations across the economy may undertake internal data assurance activities and 
they may also work with commercial data assurance specialists. These specialist 
organisations provide business-to-business offerings that allow organisations to:
▪understand risks and opportunities in the data they create, use and share themselves, 
▪to trust that the data they access and reuse from third parties
▪to share data with confidence that those they are sharing with are set up to use it while 
avoiding harmful impacts.
Data assurance is the process by which organisations assess, and demonstrate 
trustworthiness in their own data and data practices as well as the data and data 
practices of others 

17frontier economics
Data assurance processes are undertaken on an ongoing basis
▪We are considering data assurance an ongoing process which allows organisations to 
take informed decisions about the data they hold currently or will collect in the future. 
Firms engaging in data assurance activities may provide guidance, expertise and 
technical solutions as part of an overall offering.This enables their clients to make 
informed decisions with regards to the responsible usage of data to achieve their 
strategic goals.
▪Data assurance tools can help inform these decisions but some level of judgement will 
still be required and application to the relevant context at hand will be needed. The 
precise data assurance services that an industry or specific firm requires will 
vary depending on the type and volume of data collected, its underlying 
characteristics and the objectives of the organisation using the data assurance 
service. Therefore a one-size-fits all approach to data assurance or a “tick-box” 
exercise is unlikely to be successful. 
Data assurance will be a process that organisations undertake on an ongoing basis. 
These processes may occur in real time or be centred around certain events such 
as data audits
Assurance is an 
ongoing process which 
informs decision 
making in 
organisations

18frontier economics
Data assurance services can be used by data holders and data users
Data holder 
(individuals and 
organisations that can 
created or collected 
data)
Data users 
(individuals and 
organisations that can 
benefit from 
accessing data)
Some types of data users, in particular businesses seeking access to data, need to be able to assure others that they are 
trustworthy in their use of data. For example, data users mayengage with data assurance providers to demonstrate how their data 
storage processes are robust and meet industry standards to allay fears of data misuse and/or leakage.
Organisations who hold data need to be able to provide assurance that the data is fit for use (and possible onward sharing) by 
others. Data holders’ assurance activities could include implementing transparent quality control procedures and providing 
background information on how information has been collected and what rights to reuse the data have been provided, through 
clear licensing.

19frontier economics
Firms may engage with data assurance services to avoid negative 
outcomes
AVOID NEGATIVE 
OUTCOMES
Firms may be motivated by 
a desire to avoid negative 
outcomes associated with 
violating existing data 
rules and regulations
▪The rollout of economy-wide 
regulations such as the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) has 
raised awareness about the 
importance of appropriate data 
governance and privacy procedures 
in relation to personal data. Specific 
industries will also have their own rules, 
codes of conduct and/or best practices 
which individual organisations will want 
to adhere to. 
▪Data breaches or other negative 
shocks can lead to fines and 
temporary or permanent losses of 
revenue or profitability. We have seen 
several of these occurring in recent 
years.
1
Data assurance offerings such as 
“certification” and “accreditation” can help 
to ensure that organisations have 
appropriate processes in place to comply 
with existing rules and regulations 
(Oxford Insights, 2019).
▪Certification refers to evaluating 
processes or systems against certain 
standards.
▪Accreditation assessthe competence 
of an organisation to perform certain 
data related tasks
Role of data assurance

20frontier economics
Firms may engage with data assurance services to maximise value from 
data assets
MAXIMISE THE 
VALUE FROM 
DATA ASSETS
Firms increasingly want to 
make the most of the data 
they hold and ensure that 
business data becomes a 
key organisational asset. 
▪As data has become abundant in the 
modern world an increasing number 
of organisations are realising that 
data they collect and/or hold can 
drive productivity and inclusion
either via improved internal decision 
making or external usage. 
2
Data assurance offerings can help to 
▪boost internal trust in an organisation’s 
data and therefore lead to greater 
acceptance of evidence-based 
decision-making in relation to 
commercial operations.
▪increase consumers’ trust in a 
business which in turn can lead to 
greater brand value or profitability.
Role of data assurance

21frontier economics
Data assurance services are one avenue by which data sharing can be 
encouragedwhich leads to better societal and economic outcomes
▪Data assurance processes (in conjunction with other factors) can enable greater 
data sharing (to underpin these decisions) help provide confidence that data informed 
decisions are reliable. 
▪For example, a public sector health data holder may be willing in principle to share the 
data they have collected with academics who are seeking to carry out a piece of socially 
beneficial research. However, this sharing may not happen if the data holder has 
concerns about the processes and infrastructure that the researchers have in place to 
store sensitive data. Data assurance services can help to overcome this barrier:
Data 
assurance can 
lead to greater 
data sharing
Increasing the proportion of decisions taken based on data can generate significant 
benefits for all of society. 

22frontier economics
The theory of change of data assurance activities helps to lay out the 
logical flow of how they can lead to societal and economic benefits
Impacts: societal and 
economic benefits
Outcomes: changes in 
data usage
Outputs: changes in 
trust
Activities: drivers of trust
Data assurance activities allow 
organisations to assess, and 
demonstrate trustworthiness in 
their own data and data 
practices as well as the data 
and data practices of others. A 
potential data user (such as the 
academic in our example above) 
can use data assurance to 
demonstrate the quality of their 
data practices. 
Increased data assurance 
activities can (in conjunction 
with other factors) help build 
trust and confidence in data 
ecosystems. 
A data holder (such as the 
public sector organisation in our 
example above) may share data 
with greater confidence if they 
see potential users 
demonstrating their competence 
via data assurance services.
Greater levels of trust can lead 
to more data being shared and 
used. This in turn leads to 
better decisions actions and 
insights. 
In our example above this 
could include more healthy 
data being shared and socially 
beneficially research being 
carried out to inform future 
healthcare design for example. 
Consumer welfare
Gross value added
Efficiency
Wider societal benefits

23frontier economics
A data value chain can help to identify the stages at which value is 
created 
Source: Data Value chain adapted from Attard et al. (2016) and Attard et al. (2017) 
Data 
interlinking
Data sharing/ 
publishing
Data 
harmonisation
Data collection/ 
sourcing
Data 
exploitation
Data curation
A data value chain describes the data lifecycle steps which create value 
Data value chains set out the interactions between different activities which can add value in the context of collection and usage of data. These 
value chains can provide a useful perspective on creating value on a digital, intangible product. 
An example of a data value chain
Value is created/ 
sourced by 
generating data via 
primary collection or 
acquisition
Data is then 
transformed into a 
more useful and 
standardised 
format to help in 
processing
This refined data 
can then be 
published and 
shared externally
In some cases users 
will then link this 
data with other 
sources of data to 
add additional value
Organisations may then 
use this aggregated and 
processed data as a 
means to inform 
organisational decisions 
and add value internally. 
Finally, the value 
created fromthe data 
will depend on ongoing 
maintenance, updating 
and cleaning of data

24frontier economics
Data assurance can play a role at any stage of this value chain 
Data 
interlinking
Data sharing / 
publishing
Data 
harmonisation
Data collection & 
sourcing
Data 
exploitation
Data curation
Data assurance can 
help demonstrate that 
data collection 
processes are ethical 
and equitable
Assurance plays a 
role in building trust 
that data is “fit for 
sharing”
Data assurance 
enables trust in the 
insight, decision 
making and actions 
taken from data.
Data assurance 
offerings can help 
demonstrate that data 
and underlying data 
practices conforms to 
existing standards
Assurance can help 
build trust that data 
is consistent with 
other sources of data 
and confirm that 
linking does not 
create ethical issues.
Assurance offerings 
can demonstrate 
the curation 
activities are taking 
place. 
Source: adapted from Attard et al. (2016) and Attard et al. (2017) 
▪Data assurance can play a role at each part of the value chain from initial collection of data to final exploitation and usage of data either by 
the organisation who has collected the data or another organisation.
▪We have set out example data assurance offerings below which are not intended to be exhaustive. 
We can consider the potential role of data assurance at each stage of this value chain

25frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

26frontier economics
We have developed a four stage methodology to address the core 
research questions
Desk review
Step 1
Gather 
quantitative data
Step 2
Analyse 
quantitative data 
Step 3
Reporting
Step 4

27frontier economics
During the desk review stage we developed our understanding of data 
assurance and listed “key words” which informed our data collection 
Step 1. Desk review
▪Wekicked-offtheworkbycarryingoutarapiddeskbasedreviewofthedataassurancemarket.Thisbuiltonthetoolsandresources
identifiedbyODIaspartoftheirpreviousworkonbuildingtrustarounddata(2021A).Wecarriedoutonlinekeywordsearchesto
understandthescopeofexistingworkthathasbeencarriedoutinthisspaceandtoidentifyexamplesoffirmsactiveinthisspace.
▪Theoutputsofthisstepintheworkwere:(1)Asharedunderstandingofwhatismeantbydataassuranceandhowitrelatestoother
interrelatedtopics(2)examplesoffirmsactiveintheUKdatagovernancemarketand(3)examplesofdataassuranceproducts,services
andtoolsthatarecurrentlyinuse.
▪Attheconclusionofthisstageofworkweproposedalistofsearchterms(topicsandkeywords)thatwereusedtoinformthesubsequent
quantitativedatacollectionstage(seeAnnexforfulllist).
Desk review
Step 1

28frontier economics
Our desk research suggested multiple categories of key words
Overarching “foundational” terms
Data assurance services
Data assurance 
products
Characteristics of 
trustworthy data
Avoidance of negative 
outcomes
Weareconsideringdataassuranceas
anongoingprocesswhichallows
organisationstotakeinformed
decisionsaboutthedatatheyhold
currently,willcollectinthefuture,
mightaccessorshare.Thesearch
termswedefinedandsubsequent
filteringwehaveappliedhavebeen
tailoredwiththisfocusinmind.
In scope
firms who provide ongoing bespoke guidance, expertise along with technical solutions to 
support their clients to make informed decisions with regards to the responsible usage of data.
Out of scope
We are less interested in organisations who are offering standardised technology platforms 
which can be implemented enmasse in a variety of settings. 
AREA OF FOCUS
SEARCH TERM CATEGORIES

29frontier economics29
We employed an innovative web-crawling technique to identify firms 
active in this space 
Afterthelistofkeywordswasagreedfollowing
inputfromODIweusedthisAIcapabilityto
identifyanywebtextthatmaysuggestthe
companiesareinvolvedindataassurance-
relatedactivities.Thisprocessgenerateda
bespokedatasetofUKdataassurance
companiesandassociateddescriptions.Asset
outpreviouslythissearchwasinformedby
parametersandsearchtermsfromourdesk
research.
Gather 
quantitative data
Step 2
Theglass.aienginehasanongoingprocessthat
regularlycrawlsthewebsitesofover2millionUK
businesses.Thisisaugmentedwithotherrelated
contentaboutthebusinessesgatheredfrom
news,socialmediaandofficialdatasourceslike
CompaniesHouse.Thecontentisclassified
usingproprietaryartificialintelligence(AI)
technologythatunderstandswrittenlanguage.
Specifically,theglass.aiengineisabletoidentify
descriptionsofthebusinessactivitiesthatthe
companyisinvolvedinandapplythesetofurther
analysis.
We employed a 
pragmatic approach 
that relied on an 
innovative form of 
web crawling which 
allowed us to gather 
as much information 
as possible about 
firms active in the 
supply side of this 
market within a short 
space of time. 
1
Inaddition,weran“deepcrawls”ofthelarger
accountingfirms’websites,someofwhomwe
knewtobeactiveinthedataassurancemarket,
toidentifythespecifictypesofdataassurance
servicestheyoffer.Theadvantageofthis
approachwasthatalthoughtheseservicesonly
formasmallpartoftheiroffering(forexample
theymaynotappearinmaindescriptionsof
thesebusinessesactivities),thedeepcrawls
ensuredthatthesewerepickedupregardlessof
wheretheyweredescribed.
2
3
Foreachfirmidentified,weusedcompany
metricssourcedfromCompaniesHouseand
socialmediatopopulateanumberofdatafields
suchasthedescriptionofeconomicactivity,
industrysector,sizeofthecompanies
(measuredintermsofnumberofemployeesand
turnover),dataassurancetopicsidentified,
companylocationandageofcompany.To
quality-assurethedata,bothmanualand
automaticqualityassuranceprocesseswere
appliedtothedatafields(seeAnnex).
4

30frontier economics
We analysed and visualised results to address each of our research 
questions
Step 3. Analyse quantitative data
▪Thefourthstageofthestudyinvolvedanalysingthequantitativedatathathasbeencollectedviatheinnovativewebscrapingprocedurewe
havedescribedabove.Weusedthatdatasettoanswerourresearchquestionsofinterestforthispieceofwork.
▪Specifically,thedatathatwecollectedwasusedtoprovidenuancedinsightsacrossanumberofareasthatrelatetothesupplysideofthe
dataassurancemarket.Thisquantitativeanalysisprovidedgranularinformationon:thenumberoffirmsinthemarket;theoverallsizeofthe
market;thelocationoffirmsinthemarket;thetraditionalsectorinwhichthesefirmsoperate.
▪Wehaveillustratedthesefindingsintheremainderofthisreport.
Analyse 
quantitative data 
Step 3

31frontier economics
This report summarises all of the work we have undertaken and the 
conclusions we have reached
Step 4. Reporting
▪StaffattheODImetandcorrespondedwithFrontierEconomicsregularlyinordertodevelopandsteerthisresearchprojectandprovided
feedbackonanearlierdraftofthisreport.
▪Inaddition,tothisfinalreportwehavealsosharedtheunderlyingdatasetwithODIwhichwillhelptoinformtheirfutureactivitiesinthis
space.
▪AllIPdirectlygeneratedasaresultofthisworkisthepropertyofODI.
Reporting
Step 4

32frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

33frontier economics
Our first research question focuses on the size of the market for firms 
engaged in data assurance activities
SIZE OF MARKET
Quantifying the overall size of 
the data assurance market is an 
important first step in 
understanding the nature of 
provision.
Our first research question 
focuses on the overall scale of 
commercial activity in relation to 
data assurance in the UK 
economy.
1
2
3
Measuring the size of the data assurance market includes a number of specific sub-elements: 
Number  of firms engaged in data assurance activities active in the market
Number of employees working for firms offering data assurance
Turnover of firms engaged in data assurance activities active in the market
These metrics provide a sense of the magnitude of commercial activity in this space. The overall size 
of the market is an interesting metric in itself and also helps to build our understanding regrading 
potential gaps in provision.
Our approach relies on firms’ descriptions of their activity primarily via their own websites. 
This will capture the vast majority of firms offering relevant services but like any source of 
information it will not be 100% comprehensive. For example some firms may give very 
little detail of their service offering on their website and may therefore not appear in our 
list. 
Our study did not involve an empirical market definition exercise using competition 
economics. However, our chosen definition does have implications for our estimates of 
data assurance market size. We are focusing purely on suppliers of data assurance 
services and are also primarily interested in those firms who offer tailored support for 
clients / customers rather than just a technical platform. 
There are certain caveats we need to bear in mind when interpreting the market sizing results: 
Research Question 1: 
Size of market

34frontier economics
91% of the 890 identified firms had employment information available. 
They vary significantly in size based on their employee base
2
We have conservatively estimated that approximately 30,000 staff are involved in the delivery of data assurance 
activities. 
▪56% of the firms who are engaged in data assurance 
activities had < 10 employees and 87% have < 50 
employees. 
▪We identified seven firms who each employ > 10,000 staff 
(these are primarily large professional services firms). The 
majority of these employees in the largest firms will not be 
directly involved in data assurance activities. 
▪The information refers to headcount rather than full time 
equivalents.
▪Data assurance activities are likely to be a subset of a wider 
package of services especially for the larger firms. However, it is 
not possible to separately estimate the proportion of their 
employees who carry out these activities. This in some cases 
may overstate the scale of data assurance activities within firms. 
Majority of identified firms have a relatively small number of 
employees each (see chart on next slide)
Data presented below is likely to be highly representative of all 
identified firms but caution is needed when interpreting it 
1
In total, we identified 890 firms engaged in data assurance activities (for simplicity we refer to these as “data 
assurance firms” throughout, even though in some cases their commercial activity will not be entirely data assurance 
related 
Research Question 1: 
Size of market

35frontier economics
Majority of identified firms have a relatively small number of employees 
each
Breakdownofdataassurancefirmsbyemployeesizeband
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0-1 employees2-10 employees11-50 employees51-200
employees
201-500
employees
501-1,000
employees
1,001-5,000
employees
5,001-10,000
employees
10,001+
employees
Number of firms
Note: The total employment figure is based on the number of employees who have listed themselves as an employee of a firm on LinkedIn. We have assumed that only 1% of 
employees in firms with >1000 employees are engaged in data assurance activities.  The firm level employment band data is a separate variable. These two separate 
measures of employment will be highly correlated but will not always be completely consistent. 
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
Research Question 1: 
Size of market

36frontier economics
The size distribution of data assurance firms is skewed towards larger 
firms relative to the UK as a whole
ComparisonofdataassurancefirmstoallUKfirmsbyemployeesizeband
▪Recent ONS data on all tax registered UK firms suggests that 90% 
of all firms employ 9 staff or fewer, 8.5% employ 10-49 staff and the 
remaining 1.9% employ over 50 staff. 
▪Using these same categories of staff numbers, we find that in our 
sample of firms, larger firms are more common compared to the 
distribution of all UK firms. E.g. 31% of the firms we identified 
contain 10-49 employees as opposed to 8.5% of all UK firms.
▪It is possible that a larger proportion of the smallest firms in the UK 
do not have an online presence and hence won’t be picked up in our 
sample
▪It may be that data audit type services tend to be offered by 
relatively large firms which is leading to the results we have 
highlighted. 
Our sample of firms engaged in data assurance activities contain 
an above average rate of larger firms...
... and there are a number of reasons for this
Research Question 1: 
Size of market
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

37frontier economics
Turnover is an alternative measure of size however our insights are not 
representative due to high levels of missing data on revenue
3
Turnover of firms engaged in data assurance activities active in the market
▪Annual turnover data (sourced from publicly available 
Companies House information) is only available for a small 
subset of the identified firms. Specifically we have this 
metric for only 43 of our 890 firms (5%). 
▪We have illustrated the proportion of firms engaged in data 
assurance activities (who published a turnover figure) in 
different size categories. We found that almost 80% of these 
firms have an annual turnover in excess of £5 million.
Data assurance firms who do report a turnover tend to be 
very large on average (see chart on next slide)
▪This low coverage rate is primarily because small companies 
are exempted from providing this information as part of annual 
accounts and our sample of firms are predominantly SMEs.
▪Large firms will offer a suite of services and data assurance 
services are only a subset. Therefore, some proportion of 
revenue will be generated as a result of non-data assurance 
activities. It is not possible to separately estimate the proportion 
of revenue that is linked to data assurance activities. Therefore 
we have reported total revenue. 
Therefore turnover breakdowns will not be representative of 
the wider market
Research Question 1: 
Size of market

38frontier economics
Data assurance firms who do report a turnover tend to be very large on 
average 
Breakdownofdataassurancefirmsbyturnover
Note:missingdatameanthatthischartisnotrepresentativeoftheentiredataassurancemarket
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
Research Question 1: 
Size of market

39frontier economics
Examining the rate of new entry into the data assurance market can 
allow us to asses market maturity 
MATURITY OF 
MARKET
Our second research question 
focuses on the maturity of the 
data assurance market. We are 
interested in the extent to 
which data assurance service 
offerings are well established 
or rapidly emerging. The 
incorporation dates of firms 
that we have identified allow us 
to proxy market maturity. 
Exploring the incorporation dates of data assurance firms allows us to identify trends in market 
growth 
▪We can examine when our data assurance firms incorporated in the UK for the first time. Therefore 
we can determine which of our final list of market participants “entered” the market in each year. 
▪We have sourced incorporation dates from publicly available Companies House records. Date of 
incorporation data is available for 588 of our 890 data assurance firms (66%). 
It is important to note that this rate of firm entry does not represent overall growth in the 
number of relevant companies. This is because we cannot capture firms which may have 
been present in earlier years but have subsequently exited the market and were therefore 
not identified via our search term methodology. 
In addition, in some cases larger firms may have initially incorporated a relatively long 
time ago to offer services which are not in scope of our work (e.g. accounting services) 
and started to offer data assurance services more recently. We are not able to determine 
this and therefore our estimates of market entry will not always correspond to actual 
commencement of data assurance offerings. 
There are certain caveats we need to bear in mind when interpreting the results: 
Research Question 2: 
Maturity of market

40frontier economics
We found that 58% of the data assurance firms that we identified were 
incorporated in the last ten years 
▪According to the latest ONS data (2020 B) the average birth rate of firms (new entrants as a proportion of active firms) was 12.7% per annum 
(between 2018-19). In relation to our data assurance firms specifically between 2014-2020 an average of 44 new firms entered thedata 
assurance market each year (average birth rate of 11.7%). 
▪Therefore the entry of data assurance firms is roughly in line with that of the wider economy. This could potentially signal an opportunity for 
more rapid growth in the future if demand grows in line with trends in data availability. In total 58% of the data assurance firms that we 
identified were incorporated in the last ten years and 90% were incorporated after 2000.
▪We cannot identify firms who have incorporated but subsequently left the market in previous years. However, our work does provide a useful 
benchmark in this regard and subsequent analysis can track this group of firms that we have identified longitudinally. 
▪We have also reported the equivalent figure of market entry for 2021 (10 firms) even though it is clearly not complete and therefore not fully 
comparable with previous years.
Recent years have witnessed significant market entry (see chart on next slide)
This rate of firm entry does not represent overall growth in the number of relevant companies 
Research Question 2: 
Maturity of market

41frontier economics
Recent years have witnessed significant market entry to provide data 
assurance services 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1977198519881990199219941996199820002002200420062008201020122014201620182020
No. of new entrants
Marketentryovertime
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
Research Question 2: 
Maturity of market

42frontier economics
Newer entrants are smaller than more established firms 
▪We have compared the more recent market entrants to all data assurance firms in terms of number of employees. Firms who have 
incorporated since 2018 are unsurprisingly small on average than more established firms. Specifically, 95% of the recent entrants employ 10 
or fewer staff while the equivalent figure for all data assurance firms is only 56%.
▪This does not imply that the recent market entrants play an unimportant role in the market. It is these firms which may be bringing innovative 
offerings to market to address previously unmet needs. In addition, more recent entrants may offer the highest potential for future growth and 
expansion in future years. Answering these two questions could be an important part of future research in this context. 
The majority of new firms offering data assurance services are smaller businesses 
Comparisonofrecentdataassuranceentrants(since2018)toalldataassurancefirmsbyemployeesizeband
Research Question 2: 
Maturity of market
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

43frontier economics
Our third research question focuses on thesectoral and distribution of 
activities in the market (1/2)
TYPES OF FIRMS
Our third research question 
explores the sectoral 
distribution of data assurance 
firms.
Identifying the distribution of 
data assurance firms will help 
us to understand the type of 
economic activity that such 
firms are engaged in.
▪We have defined sectors according to glass.ai’sown classification system 
(see Annex). This features 14 sector groupings (e.g. technology) and 109 
sectors (e.g. computer hardware). This bespoke classification system is based 
on data read from the web -predicted from the company description and other 
web content. 
▪We have also defined sectors by the Office for National Statistics’ (ONS) 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes The SIC is divided into 21 
sections (e.g. manufacturing), which are then further broken down into 88 
divisions (e.g. manufacture of textiles), 272 groups (e.g. manufacture of other 
textiles) and 615 classes (e.g. manufacture of carpets and rugs). SIC codes 
are used by ONS to classify businesses according to the type of economic 
activity in which they are engaged. The two classification systems are not 
directly comparable
Data assurance firms will not all be included under a single ONS SIC code 
class or glass.ai sector. The different classifications of the data 
assurance firms further demonstrates the difficulty in isolating relevant 
services within a single traditional market. This is because data 
assurance activity can play a role across many traditional sectors and stages 
of the value chain.
There are certain caveats we need to bear in mind when interpreting the results: 
Note: We have used both of these classification systems because they offer distinct advantages. glass.ai’sclassification is more recent and therefore may 
represent a more up-to-date breakdown of firms. However, SIC codes are widely used as part of official statistics which allows us to compare data 
assurance firms to the rest of the economy.. Both of these distributions indicate the range of sectors that data assurance firmsare active in.
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
Sectoral 
distribution

44frontier economics
Our third research question focuses on thesectoral and distribution of 
activities in the market (2/2)
TYPES OF LOCATIONS
Our third research question 
also  explores the geographical 
distribution of data assurance 
firms.
Identifying the distribution of 
data assurance firms will help 
us to understand the locations 
of economic activity that such 
firms are based in.
This will provide an indication of which parts of the UK are flooded with 
data assurance firms and which areas have less provision. However, 
many of these types of services may not require physical interaction so 
potential customers across the UK may be able to tap in the offerings of 
firms who are not necessarily physically proximate
There are certain caveats we need to bear in mind when interpreting the results: 
Some data assurance firms might have multiple offices across UK. We have 
identified their main offices based on data read from the web -predicted from 
the company description and other web content. 
Geographical 
distribution
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?

45frontier economics
Data assurance activity is spread across many different clusters of 
economic activity as we would expect
Topthreeglass.aiSectorGrouping:percentagesTopthreetwodigitSICcodes:percentages
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
▪A glassi.ai sector grouping and sector is available for all of our 890 data assurance firms. Using this glass.ai classification system we 
have found that 67% of data assurance firms identified in our sample are in the Technology sector grouping. The top three sector 
groupings (this is the more aggregated level of economic activity) Technology, Professional Services, and Financial Services collectively 
account for 96% of the firms in our sample firms (we have also explored the more granular sector breakdown which is presentedonthe next 
page). 
▪SIC codes are available for 579 of our data assurance firms (65%). The most commonly appearing SIC code divisions (two digit code) 
was  Computer programming, consultancy and related activities. The top three most frequent two-digit SIC codes in our data (Computer 
programming, consultancy and related activities, Activities of head offices; management consultancy activities and Office administrative, 
office support and other business support activities) accounted for 77% of the data assurance firms.
Data assurance firms are most commonly found in “technology sectors”
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
Source: Frontier analysis of SIC data by ONS

46frontier economics
We cannot isolate data assurance activities within a single traditional 
sector (1)
Toptenglass.aisub-sectors:percentages
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
▪Previously showed a high level classification of data assurance firms’ sectoral composition. We have also examined a more granular 
breakdown to better understand the specific types of economic activities that the data assurance firms in our sample are undertaking. 
▪Using the glass.ai classification system we found the most common sectors, included Information Technology and Services, 
Consulting, and Computer Software. This illustrates the wide range of sectors that data assurance companies are active in. It also 
reinforces the point that we cannot isolate data assurance activities within a single traditional sector. 
▪We have also examined the sectoral mix of recent market entrants (firms that incorporated since 2018). Overall the breakdown is relatively 
similar to the pattern we observe amongst all data assurance firms. Recent entrants are slightly more likely than all data assurance 
firms to be classified in the Information Technology and Services sector (48% vs 44%) and slightly less likely to be in the 
Accounting sector (1% vs. 2%).
Data assurance firms specialise in technology, finance and professional service areas 
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

47frontier economics
We cannot isolate data assurance activities within a single traditional 
sector (2)
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
▪We have examined the most common five digit SIC classifications amongst our data assurance firms. Collectively the top 10 5 digit SIC 
codes account for 86% of firms identified. Computer consultancy services, management consultancy services, data processing activities and 
business support services all feature prominently. 
A similar pattern can be seen using granular SIC classifications 
ToptenSICsub-sectors(5digitclasses):percentages
Source: Frontier analysis of SIC data by ONS

48frontier economics
Data assurance firms are over-represented in sectors such as computer 
programming, and management consulting
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
▪We have used the overall breakdown of UK firms as a benchmark for the classification of data assurance firms. We can see thatthe sectoral 
breakdown of data assurance firms differs significantly from the overall distribution of all UK firms. 
▪In the table below we compare the percentage of data assurance firms appearing in the six SIC code divisions that contain thehighest 
number of these firms with the percentage of all UK companies in these divisions. We see that data assurance firms are over-represented 
in sectors such as computer programming, management consulting and information service activities relative to all UK 
companies.
We can see that the sectoral breakdown of data assurance firms differs from the overall distribution of all UK firms
SIC divisionData assurance companiesAll UK companies (ONS data)
Computer programming; consultancy and 
related activities
55%6%
Activities of head offices; management 
consultancy activities 
15%7%
Office administrative and other business 
support activities 
7%6%
Information service activities5%0.4%
Other professional, scientific and technical 
activities
4%3%
Publishing activities2%0.5%
Source: Frontier analysis of SIC data by ONS

49frontier economics
Firms classified in the accounting sector tend to be larger than other 
data assurance firms  
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0-1 employees2-10 employees11-50
employees
51-200
employees
201-500
employees
501-1,000
employees
1,001-5,000
employees
5,001-10,000
employees
10,001+
employees
Prportion of firms
Information Technology and ServicesConsultingComputer Software
Computer Networking and SecurityInformation ServicesSecurity and Investigations
General Financial ServicesAccountingLaw Practice and Services
Oil and EnergyOthers
Sub-sectoraldistributionoffirmsbynumberofemployees
Research Question 3: 
In what sectors are firms based?
▪We have also examined the interactions between firm size and sectoral classification. Using the glass.ai classification system we can see 
that accounting firms are overrepresented in the larger size bands (all categories which cover more than 50 employees). It isthese audit type 
firms who are therefore most likely to be providing data assurance services alongside other service offerings. These firms also tend to be 
older on average.
Accounting firms tend to have a higher number of employees on average 
Sub-sectoraldistributionoffirmsbynumberofemployees
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

50frontier economics
Certain regions such as London contain a disproportionate share of 
data assurance companies
RegionData assurance providersAll UK companies
London40%19%
South East17%15%
North West7%10%
West Midlands7%8%
East of England6%10%
South West6%9%
Scotland5%7%
East Midlands3%7%
Yorkshire and The Humber3%7%
North East3%3%
Wales2%4%
Northern Ireland1%3%
▪We have also examined where the data assurance firms identified in our sample are located in the UK using available location indicators 
drawn from Companies House and LinkedIn. Overall, 69% of firms in our sample have data which we can use to determine the relevant UK 
regions. From the table below, we see that there is a clear clustering of firms around London which contains 40% of the firmsinour sample. 
This is more than twice the proportion of all UK firms who are based in London.
▪This may suggest the emergence of a data assurance cluster in London. This is in keeping with wider tech industry location 
trends. Previous research by Tech Nation (2021) found that London was fourth for tech VC investment globally in 2020 and is for example 
the second biggest Fintech hub. The data we have used may exaggerate this somewhat if large firms with multiple sites are more likely to 
report their London address than other locations
There is a clear clustering of firms around London which contains 40% of the firms in our sample
Research Question 3: 
In what locations are firms based?
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

51frontier economics
Data assurance companies are located in urban areas across the UK
GeographicdistributionofUKDataassurancefirms
Research Question 3: 
In what locations are firms based?
▪We have mapped the precise location of each data 
assurance firm using the postcodes associated with the 
address provided in their Linkedinprofiles/websites.
▪In line with the regional results we present on the 
previous page we see that there is a clear grouping of 
firms around London and the south of the country.
▪There are also pockets of data assurance activity in all 
regions which tend to be clustered around urban 
centres. 
Overall, we have been able to gather location data 
for 70% of the firms in our sample. 
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

52frontier economics
▪We defined a list of keywords we then used to identify data assurance firms. We based this list on 
a rapid desk research exercise, our own experience and conversations with ODI. It represents a 
robust and coherent list of potential activities, products and services but may not be entirely 
comprehensive given the wide range of terminology used in this context. 
▪In addition, we also carried out specific deep dives into larger ‘accounting’ firms who were knew to 
be active in this market. This allows us to better understand specific business moils and service 
offerings that are in place currently.
Examining the number of firms that matched against search terms 
allowed us to highlight common assurance services
TYPES OF PRODUCTS 
AND SERVICES
Our last research question 
focusses on the success of 
search terms in identifying 
firms as part of our web crawl 
exercise. 
We are interested in the type of 
products and services that are 
offered by the firms active in 
the data assurance market and 
the topic matches can provide 
an overall indication of this. 
It also may be the case that firms do offer categories of products/services which are not 
explicitly included in their website. If this is the case they will not be picked up by our 
analysis. 
There are certain caveats we need to bear in mind when interpreting the results: 
Exploring which firms include specific search terms in their descriptions of their offerings 
provides an indication of data assurance offerings present in the market. 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

53frontier economics
The majority of firms we identified may focus on a specific niche 
within the market
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
12345+
Proportion of firms
Proportionoffirmsmatchingwithdifferentnumberoftopics
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
Sub-sectoraldistributionoffirmsbynumberofemployees
▪As part of the strategy to collect data on data assurance firms, we had identified 75 keywords / phrases. All of the data assurance firms we 
identified matched against at least one of these 75 search terms. 
▪77% of the firms we identified only matched against a single keyword / phrase, 16% matched against two terms and the remaining 7% 
matched against three or more terms. This provides tentative evidence that the firms we have identified tend on the whole to focus 
on a specific niche within the topic of data assurance primarily (e.g. verification of source data or prevention of data leakage), 
rather than trying to provide a more all encompassing offer. Further research will be needed to confirm this
▪We have also examined the number of topic matches of recent market entrants (firms that incorporated since 2018). Data assurance firms 
who have incorporated more recently are slightly more likely to only match against a single of our keywords than all data 
assurance firms (80% vs. 77%). This may provide tentative evidence that newer firms are slightly more likely to be focusing on a specific 
niche of data assurance relative to more established firms. 
Overall, most firms may have narrow data assurance offerings
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

54frontier economics
52 out of 72 search terms identified all the firms in our sample 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
▪72% of the firms we identified were linked to one of the top 10 most frequent 
topics. ‘Data management’, ‘Data governance’ and ‘Data Security’ were the most 
frequently matched topics. The specific term ‘data assurance’ matched with only 8 firms. 
These firms also matched against other terms-‘data management’, ‘data governance’, 
‘data security’, IT governance’, ‘data quality’ and ‘data breach’.
▪The top 10 list included search terms from all five our search term categories 
which suggests the identified firms use a broad vocabulary to describe their 
offerings. Unsurprisingly it is the search terms from the “overarching category” which 
identified the most firms. These more generic terms will capture more organisations than 
specific articulations of products or services.  Some of these terms will be synonymous 
with each other (data management and information management will likely refer to very 
similar service offerings). In other cases data assurance firms may be describing the 
same problem from two different perspectives. For example, two firms may offer very 
similar services but one emphasises how they can increase quality while another 
focuses on the avoidance of risk.
▪We have also examined the frequency of successful matches amongst recent market 
entrants (firms that incorporated since 2018). The top-10 list is broadly similar. However, 
data compliance and data integrity both feature in the top 10 of most commonly 
appearing terms when we look at recent market entrants only and do not feature 
in the overall list above. This could represent a slight shift in the type of offerings 
amongst newer firms. 
Most of the data assurance firms are identified through a subset of topic 
matches
Successful search 
terms can help to 
identify the types 
of products and 
services offered 
in the market

55frontier economics
Data management and data governance were the two most commonly 
identified search terms
Proportionoffirmsidentifiedagainsttop10searchterms
Overarching “foundational” terms
Data assurance services
Data assurance products
Characteristics of trustworthy 
data
Avoidance of negative 
outcomes
Searchcategories
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

56frontier economics
Terms such as data accreditation and data validation did not match 
against any firms
▪Unsuccessful search terms included:
Foundation terms such as data accreditation and data validity
Characteristics of trustworthy data such as data guarantee and data confidence 
Servicessuch as computer assisted auditing techniques
Productssuch as data documentation 
Avoidance of negative outcomes such as data loss prevention techniques
▪This implies that these type of offerings are not explicitly referred to by data 
assurance firms themselves. This could provide tentative evidence of gaps in the 
market and could also reflect differences in vocabulary used across the industry. 
Likewise some of the terms which only matched against a small number of firms 
could also be potential gaps that are worthy of further exploration for ODI. 
Overall, 23 search terms did not identify any firm
Unsuccessful 
search terms 
can help 
highlight 
potential gaps 
in the market 
for data 
assurance 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

57frontier economics
Our list of data assurance firms includes multiple examples of offerings 
at different stages of the value chain 
Data value chain
▪“We provide resources, 
skills and technology to 
access better data 
faster. We assist by 
delivering an integrated 
data solution from 
forming a data strategy 
to the automation of 
data collection, data 
cleansing, data 
classification”
▪“Empowers 
organizations to 
unlock more value 
from their data and to 
accelerate data-driven 
business models 
through its secure, 
custom-branded data 
sharing and 
collaboration 
platform (delivered 
as a service.” 
▪“Data quality 
solutions that 
improve customer 
engagement and 
help you make 
smarter decisions 
using the most 
accurate data”
▪“Our mission is to 
help clients derive 
value from data and 
make data driven 
decisions”
▪“Data consultancy with 
a mission to empower 
you and your data. 
Services include data 
set-up and 
harmonisation”
▪““We allow for 
collaboration across 
organisational and 
technological 
boundaries. Our 
products and services 
use semantic web 
techniques and 
linked data principles 
to improve the search 
and discovery of 
information.”
▪“We tailor our data 
security systems 
and solutions to 
meet your 
businesses every 
requirement. The 
solutions ensure 
prevention of data 
leakage, whether at 
rest within the 
network, mobile 
device or storage or 
indeed data in transit 
across public or 
private networks.”
As described previously the data value chain describes various value adding process from initial collection of data through to its use and 
exploitation. Data assurance offerings exist currently in the market at each stage of this conceptual value chain. We have provided examples 
below which are taken directly from firms’ own descriptions and are illustrative rather than exhaustive. 
Source: adapted from Attard et al. (2016) and Attard et al. (2017) 
Data 
interlinking
Data sharing/ 
publishing
Data 
harmonisation
Data collection & 
sourcing
Data 
exploitation
Data curation
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
We can use the data value chain to highlight examples of firms’ data assurance offerings

58frontier economics
We carried out a deep-dive crawl of professional services firms
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
Firstly over 100 professional firms were identified
Our deep crawl then found that 15 of these firms offered relevant 
services according to their website 
The deep crawl then collected multiple pieces of evidence from the 
websites of these 15 companies. The top ranked evidence (up to four 
pieces per organisation has been included in our final dataset)
Figure:Stepsinthedeepcrawlexercise
▪Before carrying out the web crawl we knew that medium to large professional services firms offer some data assurance services(in addition 
to traditional financial auditing services or broader technology based consulting). We therefore carried out a deeper crawl across known UK 
professional services firms to:
oestablish which of these firms offered services which were in scope of our review; and
ohighlight the specific products and services that they offer and the business models they have adopted. 
▪This deep dive crawl consisted of three steps. This provided more granular and detailed data on the specific data assurance offerings of 
these 15 firms than we have for the remainder of the sample. 
Professional services firms will compose an important segment within the data assurance market 
1
2
3
Identify all potential professional services 
firms
Identify which of these firms offers relevant 
services
Collect multiple pieces of information in 
terms of service offerings from each firm

59frontier economics
Services offered by professional services firms tended to fall into a 
number of categories
We have grouped the service offerings regarding data assurance activities described by professional services firms into a 
number of groups:
Improving data 
governance
Data privacy & 
security
Data 
compliance
Increasing 
data quality
Sharing data
Making best 
use of data
Outcome focused
Process focused
▪Our clients have: 
“challenges with 
respect to (further) 
setting up data 
governance, master 
data management, 
data quality 
management and 
data lineage across 
the entire 
organization”
▪Our “services cover 
a wide range of risk 
scenarios such as 
employee error, 
algorithmic bias, 
faulty algorithm 
design, malicious 
manipulation and 
poor data quality, 
all of which can 
lead to non-
compliance with 
data protection and 
privacy regulations”
▪“Projects may be 
undertaken to 
provide assurance 
for the Board and 
other stakeholders 
on data quality or 
entity status.”
▪“Improving data 
accuracy and 
creating valuable 
insights for our 
client”
▪Data quality 
solutions continue 
to mature through 
the addition of more 
augmented 
capabilities than 
before, driven by 
growing needs in 
existing and new 
use cases
▪“Data management 
across data 
ecosystems require 
significant time and 
investment just to 
achieve 
consistency and 
traceability to 
improve trust with 
customers”
▪“We are able to 
help companies 
manage data, 
identify and mitigate 
issues such as bias 
or unnecessary 
access that could 
compromise data 
integrity, and drive 
increased 
confidence in 
insights driven by 
AI ”
Category of 
offering / 
capability 
Example 
description 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

60frontier economics
The professional services firms we identified refer to different 
combinations of data assurance offerings 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
▪In the table below we have illustrated which of the 15 professional services firms included content on their website that referred to one of the 
six topic categories which we defined. 
▪We can see that different firms use different terminology to describe their services and occupy different places in the market. The most 
common category of capability / offering relates to data governance. 
Professional services firms will compose an important segment within the data assurance market 
Source: Frontier analysis of data collected by glass.ai

61frontier economics
We have also examined the most common business models used 
by data assurance firms
1 See for example: https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/small-business/what-is-a-business-model
List of businesses model categories
Advertising
Affiliate marketing
Bundling
Consulting
Digital goods
Direct sales
Distribution
E-commerce
Franchise
Leasing
Licensing
Manufacturer
Marketplace
Peer-to-peer
Product to service
Retailer
Subscription
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered
▪To explore the types of commercial model employed by data assurance firms we 
have examined the content of each data assurance firm’s website home page. This 
will provide an indication of how data assurance firms earn revenue and what type 
of organisations they typically offer their services to. 
▪We firstly defined a list of 17 business models based on our previous experience 
and existing categorisations.1 We then crawled the website homepages for 
references to these known business models. This allowed us to determine the 
frequency with which certain commercial operating models are being used. 
▪Firms may operate a mixed model with multiple revenue streams. Therefore it is 
possible that firms match against multiple business models categories. In total we 
business model signals were picked up for 710 companies (80% of our list).
We can provide a high level indication of the business models that are being 
used by data assurance firms 

62frontier economics
The majority of data assurance firms are consultancies. Firms also note 
targeted market sectors and revenue generation routes (1/2)
Consulting is by far the most common business model identified (669 firms). It involves building up experience and 
expertise in specific domains of data assurance and then carrying out work for clients.
E.g. “We are dedicated to protecting client's reputation by providing strategic and pragmatic advice to provide information 
security”
Examples include:
▪retailers (94 data assurance firms). E.g. “We provide the full suite of data management services 
(advisory, consultancy, Master Data Management (MDM), Product Information Management (PIM), 
Data Quality. Client examples include leading Retailers, Manufacturers, Government Agencies”
▪distributors (73 data assurance firms). E.g. “We are a data security, governance, regulation and 
compliance (GRC) solution provider. Our systems help to protect over a million users in areas as 
diverse as security services, manufacturing, and distribution”
▪advertising platforms (80 data assurance firms). E.g. “specialise in design and delivery of 
information management software and technology products and platforms. We provide consultancy 
services to the Information Technology, Advertising, Marketing, Design and Media and Transport 
industries”
Other examples of customer segments include e-commerce, finance and healthcare
Many data assurance companies talk about the clients they serve (who themselves will 
adopt a variety of business models). 
Customer 
base
1
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

63frontier economics
The majority of data assurance firms are consultancies. Firms also note 
targeted market sectors and revenue generation routes (2/2)
Revenue 
generation
2
This includes:
▪Subscription  services (72 data assurance firms). E.g. “We cover Compliance, Security, Information 
Governance and Contracts. Our services are accessible and cost effective with a monthly subscription 
service that allow you to choose the packages and package components that apply to you”
▪Licencing services (37 data assurance firms). E.g. “The company behind the new standard for data 
security. We commercially exploit our IP through licensing agreements, and by offering a base product 
and implementation design book. Our team also brings the opportunity for consultancy, development and 
industry thought-leadership”
Other firms offer a subscription or licencing service to clients which features a mix of 
platform access and ongoing sharing of expertise. 
Research Question 4: 
Types of products and services offered

64frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

65frontier economics
Our work has provided a comprehensive overview ofthe firms providing 
data assurance services in the UK and their characteristics 
Our work provides 
useful insights into 
the market for data 
assurance
1
Frontier Economics and glass.ai were commissioned by ODI to carry out a detailed study of 
the size, features and characteristics of the market for data assurance services in the UK. 
The novel dataset we have created and the subsequent analysis we have carried out has highlighted a 
number of interesting findings:
▪We identified 890 providers who explicitly refer to data assurance capabilities or offerings. This market 
has been growing steadily. Recent entrants may offer opportunities for growth in the coming years.  
▪Data assurance firms offer a variety of services to customers in multiple markets. Some large 
accounting firms do offer a range of data assurance services alongside more traditional financial audit 
offerings. 
▪Data assurance firms are disproportionately based in London. Other parts of the country may be less 
well served. 
▪Some types of offering such as data accreditation for example are not explicitly referred to by data 
assurance firms themselves. This could provide tentative evidence of gaps in the market and could 
also reflect differences in vocabulary used across the industry. 

66frontier economics
Further research 
could build on the 
work we have 
carried out 
2
Some research questions were beyond the scope of our study. We did not engage directly 
with data assurance providers/their customers who could provide insights on:
Some interesting research questions were beyond the scope of our study. We did not engage directly 
with data assurance providers or their customers who would be able to provide insights on:
▪Demand for data assurance:
oWhat are key user needs in this context?
oWhat are current levels of customer satisfaction?
oAre there consumption externalities? 
▪Supply of data assurance
oWhat are the latest trends in provision? 
oWhat are the barriers to further expansion?
Our work also provides a direction on where the data assurance market 
can benefit from further research

67frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

68frontier economics
References (1)
▪Attard, J., Orlandi, F. and Auer, S., 2016, October. Data value networks: enabling a new data ecosystem. In 2016 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI) (pp. 453-456). IEEE.
▪Attard, J., Orlandi, F. and Auer, S., 2017, March. Exploiting the value of data through data value networks. 
InProceedings of the 10th international conference on theory and practice of electronic governance(pp. 475-484).
▪Digital Competition Expert Panel (2019) Unlocking digital competition 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/unlocking-digital-competition-report-of-the-digital-competition-expert-panel
▪Digital Curation Centre’s (2010) Data Accreditation overview 
https://www.dcc.ac.uk/sites/default/files/documents/resource/briefing-papers/Abbott%20Data%20accreditation.pdf
▪Frontier Economics (2020) Geospatial Data Market Study Report 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/enhancing-the-uks-geospatial-ecosystem/frontier-economics-geospatial-
data-market-study-report-executive-summary
▪Frontier Economics (2021) Economic Impact of Trust in Data Ecosystems https://theodi.org/article/the-economic-impact-
of-trust-in-data-ecosystems-frontier-economics-for-the-odi-report/
▪Gartner (2021) Magic Quadrant for Data Quality Solutions https://www.gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=1-
25D4TRC9&ct=210302&st=sb
▪ICO (2021 A) Certification https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-
protection-regulation-gdpr/accountability-and-governance/certification/
▪ICO (2021 B) Data sharing code of practice https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/data-sharing-a-code-of-practice-1-
0.pdf

69frontier economics
References (2)
▪ICO (2021 C) Guide to the UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK GDPR) https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-
to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/
▪ISO (2021) ISO/IEC 27001: Information Security Management https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html
▪ODI (2021 A) R&D: Building trust through audit and certification https://theodi.org/project/building-trust-through-audit-
and-certification/
▪ODI (2021 B) What is assurance? https://theodi.org/article/assurance-trust-confidence-what-does-it-all-mean-for-data/
▪ONS (2020 A) UK business: activity, size and location 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/business/activitysizeandlocation/datasets/ukbusinessactivitysizeandlo
cation
▪ONS (2020 B) Business demography, UK: 2019 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/business/activitysizeandlocation/bulletins/businessdemography/2019
▪Oxford Insights (2019) Exploring Data Trust Certifications https://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Report_-
Exploring-Data-Trust-Certification.pdf 

70frontier economics
1.Executive summary4
2.Background and context13
3.Approach and methodology25
4.Results 32
5.Conclusion64
6.References 67
7.Annex 70

71frontier economics
Search terms(1)
Overarching “foundational” terms
▪Data assurance
▪Information assurance
▪Information management assurance  
▪Data governance
▪IT governance
▪Data certification 
▪Data accreditation
▪Data validation 
▪Data validity
▪Trust in data processes 
▪Data sharing
▪Data ethics 
▪Digital trust
▪Data control
▪Data management
▪Data assessment
Overarching 
“foundational” 
terms
This list includes high 
level terms that firms 
might use to describe an 
overarching suite of 
offerings in this space.
Multiple firms may 
describe very similar 
offerings in slightly 
different ways so we 
have included as many 
synonyms as possible.  

72frontier economics
Search terms (2)
Characteristics of trustworthy data
Characteristics 
of trustworthy 
data
This list includes 
features of trustworthy 
data that can be 
assessed / certified as 
part of a data assurance 
product or service
▪Data accuracy 
▪Data standards
▪Data confidence 
▪Data guarantee
▪Data accountability 
▪Data standardisation
▪Data quality
▪Data reliability 

73frontier economics
Search terms (3)
Data assurance services
Services 
This list includes specific 
services which may be 
offered by data 
assurance firms 
▪Data auditing
▪Data strategy
▪Data audit
▪Data security
▪Data curation
▪Data protection audit
▪Data quality assessment
▪Computer Assisted Auditing Techniques
▪Audit data analytics
▪Augmented data quality
▪Data profiling
▪SOC 2
▪ISO / IEC 27001
▪Certified Information Security Manager
▪Certified Information Systems Auditor / 
Professional

74frontier economics
Search terms (4)
Data assurance products
Products
This list includes specific 
elements of data 
assurance platforms
▪Metadata management
▪Data documentation
▪Master data management
▪Data catalogue
▪Reference data management 

75frontier economics
Search terms (5)
Avoidance of negative outcomes
Avoidance of 
negative 
outcomes
This list includes 
negative outcomes that 
data assurance process 
can help to avoid
▪Data compliance
▪Data remediation 
▪Data loss prevention techniques 
▪Data breach
▪GDPR compliance 
▪Data leakage

76frontier economics
The web crawling process can be further broken down into four sub-
steps
Data 
exploration
▪Agreement on 
keywords
▪Algorithm reads 2 
million UK business 
websites
▪Discovery of additional 
sources
Intelligent 
crawling
▪Gathering and 
structuring of open 
web data
▪Reading social media 
and news sites to 
augment results
Analysis 
& QA
▪Automatic / manual 
QA processes
▪Removing anomalies
▪Match with official data 
sources
Data 
delivery
▪Packaging of data 
▪Sharing of final CSV

77frontier economics
We implemented two additional criteria to improve precision without 
compromising on comprehensiveness 
Rulestoimproveaccuracyofquantitativedatacollection
▪Allofthesearchtermswedefinedcouldincertaincircumstancesbeusedbyabusinesstorefertoanactivityorserviceofferingthatisin-
scopeforthepurposesofourwork.However,everyfirmwhichincludesanyofthesekeywordsontheirwebsitewillnotnecessarilybe
relevant.Thisisbecausecertainaspectsofdataassuranceterminologymaybeusedinconsistentlyacrossthelandscapeforawiderange
ofin-scopeservices/productsaswellasmoregenericorlessrelevantofferings.Wethereforeimplementedtwoadditionalrulestoincrease
precisionandlimittheamountofmanualinputandad-hocdecisionmakingrequiredtoreachafinaldataset:
Aninitialmanualreviewofasampleofdatarevealedthatthevastmajorityoffirmsclassifiedincertainsectorsoftheeconomy
tendedtoberelevantforourwork(e.g.InformationTechnologyandServices,ComputerNetworkingandSecurity,Consulting)
whereasthebulkoffirmsinothersectors(e.g.Healthcare)tendedtobe“false”matches.Wethereforeprimarilyfocusedona
subsetofsectorswhichyieldedahighmatchrateduringthisinitialreviewstage.Firmswhichmatchedagainstoneofour
searchtermsbutwerenotclassifiedinoneofthosecoresectorswerenottakenforwardintothefinaldataset.
Wewereconsciousthattheremaybeasmallnumberofrelevantfirmsinnon-coresectorswhowedidnotwanttoexclude.
Therefore,allfirmswhichmatchedagainstmorethanonesearchterm(regardlessofsector)wasincludedinthefinaldataset.
Firmswhichincludedmorethanoneofourtermsontheirwebsitearefarmorelikelytobeinscopeforourworkoverall.
▪Thesetworulesofferapragmaticbalancebetweenprecisionandcomprehensiveness.
Excludefirmsfromperipheralsectors:
Unlesstheymatchagainstmultiplesearchterms:

78frontier economics
glass.ai firm sectoral classification (1) 
Sector GroupingSector
Consumer Goods and ServicesApparel and Fashion
Consumer Goods and ServicesConsumer Electronics
Consumer Goods and ServicesConsumer Products and Services
Consumer Goods and ServicesCosmetics and Toiletries
Consumer Goods and ServicesFood and Beverages
Consumer Goods and ServicesFurniture
Consumer Goods and ServicesLuxury Goods and Jewellery
Consumer Goods and ServicesRetail
Consumer Goods and ServicesSporting Goods
Consumer Goods and ServicesTextiles
Consumer Goods and ServicesTobacco
Consumer Goods and ServicesWholesale
Consumer Goods and ServicesWine and Spirits
Energy and EnvironmentalEnvironmental Services and Conservation
Energy and EnvironmentalOil and Energy
Energy and EnvironmentalRenewables and Sustainability
Energy and EnvironmentalUtilities
Financial ServicesBanking
Financial ServicesGeneral Financial Services
Financial ServicesInsurance
Financial ServicesInvestment Banking and Advisory
Financial ServicesInvestment Management
Financial ServicesVenture Capital and Private Equity
GovernmentCentral and Local Government
GovernmentGovernment Agencies and Other Public Bodies
GovernmentPolitical
Healthcare and ScientificAlternative Medicine
Healthcare and ScientificBiotechnology
Healthcare and ScientificHospitals and Medical Practices
Healthcare and ScientificLife Sciences and Pharmaceuticals
Healthcare and ScientificMedical Devices
Healthcare and ScientificR&D and Scientific
Healthcare and ScientificVeterinary
Sector GroupingSector
Industrial and AgricultureAgribusiness and Fishery
Industrial and AgricultureAviation, Aerospace and Defense
Industrial and AgricultureChemicals
Industrial and AgricultureElectrical and Electronic Manufacturing
Industrial and AgricultureIndustrial Automation
Industrial and AgricultureMachinery
Industrial and AgricultureMechanical and Industrial Engineering
Industrial and AgricultureMining and Metals
Industrial and AgriculturePackaging and Print
Industrial and AgriculturePaper and Forest Products
Industrial and AgriculturePlastics
Leisure and HospitalityEntertainment and Leisure
Leisure and HospitalityEvents Services
Leisure and HospitalityGambling and Casinos
Leisure and HospitalityHealth, Wellness and Fitness
Leisure and HospitalityHospitality and Restaurants
Leisure and HospitalityLeisure, Travel and Tourism
Leisure and HospitalityRecreational Facilities and Services
Leisure and HospitalitySports
Media and ArtsAnimation
Media and ArtsArts and Crafts
Media and ArtsBroadcast Media (TV, Radio)
Media and ArtsMedia Production
Media and ArtsMotion Pictures and Film
Media and ArtsMusic
Media and ArtsNewspapers and Magazines
Media and ArtsOnline Media
Media and ArtsPhotography
Media and ArtsPublishing
Media and ArtsWriting and Editing

79frontier economics
glass.ai firm sectoral classification (2) 
Sector GroupingSector
Non Profit and EducationCharities and Foundations
Non Profit and EducationE-Learning
Non Profit and EducationEducation Management
Non Profit and EducationHigher Education and Universities
Non Profit and EducationLibraries
Non Profit and EducationMuseums
Non Profit and EducationPlaces of Worship
Non Profit and EducationPrimary and Secondary Education
Non Profit and EducationProfessional and Trade Associations
Non Profit and EducationProfessional Training and Coaching
Non Profit and EducationThink Tanks
Professional ServicesAccounting
Professional ServicesBusiness Supplies and Equipment
Professional ServicesConsulting
Professional ServicesDesign
Professional ServicesInformation Services
Professional ServicesLaw Practice and Services
Professional ServicesMarket Research
Professional ServicesMarketing and Advertising
Professional ServicesOutsourcing and Offshoring
Professional ServicesPublic Relations and Communications
Professional ServicesSecurity and Investigations
Professional ServicesStaffing and Recruiting
Professional ServicesTranslation
Sector GroupingSector
Real Estate and ConstructionArchitecture and Planning
Real Estate and ConstructionBuilding Materials
Real Estate and ConstructionCivil Engineering
Real Estate and ConstructionConstruction
Real Estate and ConstructionExecutive Offices
Real Estate and ConstructionFacilities Services
Real Estate and ConstructionGlass, Ceramics and Concrete
Real Estate and ConstructionReal Estate and Property Management
Supply Chain and TransportAutomotive
Supply Chain and TransportImport and Export
Supply Chain and TransportLogistics and Supply Chain
Supply Chain and TransportMaritime
Supply Chain and TransportTransportation, Trucking and Railroad
Supply Chain and TransportWarehousing
TechnologyComputer Games
TechnologyComputer Hardware
TechnologyComputer Networking and Security
TechnologyComputer Software
TechnologyInformation Technology and Services
TechnologyInternet
TechnologySemiconductors and Electronic Systems
TechnologyTelecommunications and Wireless

FrontierEconomicsLtdisamemberoftheFrontierEconomicsnetwork,whichconsistsoftwoseparatecompaniesbasedinEurope(Frontier
EconomicsLtd)andAustralia(FrontierEconomicsPtyLtd).Bothcompaniesareindependentlyowned,andlegalcommitmentsenteredintoby
onecompanydonotimposeanyobligationsontheothercompanyinthenetwork.AllviewsexpressedinthisdocumentaretheviewsofFrontier
EconomicsLtd.