

 
 
 
 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST 
IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Report prepared for the ODI 
February 2021 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Frontier Economics Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, which consists of two separate companies based in Europe (Frontier 
Economics Ltd) and Australia (Frontier Economics Pty Ltd). Both companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by 
one company do not impose any obligations on the other company in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier 
Economics Ltd. 
 

 
frontier economics   
 
 ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements 4 
ODI FOREWORD 5 
Executive Summary 6 
1 Background & Methodology 8 
1.1 Context 8 
1.2 Approach 10 
2 Economic Framework 19 
2.1 Modelling trust in a data ecosystem 19 
2.2 Logic model 23 
3 Framework Calibration and Quantitative Evidence 30 
3.1 Evidence used 30 
3.2 Framework calibration 30 
3.3 Aggregate impact of trust on data sharing 35 
3.4 Impact of changes in trust in data ecosystems 42 
3.5 Economic impact of data sharing 51 
3.6 Evidence gaps and direction of future research 53 
4 Conclusion 56 
5 Bibliography 58 
Annex A Additional Detail on Evidence Review and Analytic 
Strategy 64 
 
 
 
 
 

 
frontier economics  4 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Frontier Economics were assisted throughout by Dr Kieron O’Hara. Staff at the ODI 
met and corresponded with Frontier Economics regularly in order to develop and 
steer  this  research  project.  However,  the  robustness  of  the  findings  are  the 
responsibility of Frontier Economics alone. We are grateful to Liz Brandt from Ctrl-
Shift who agreed to be interviewed as part of this project. 

 
frontier economics  5 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
ODI FOREWORD 
Data  flows  can create  value  for  our  societies  in  a  myriad  of  ways:  when  data  is 
made  open  or  shared,  it  enables  better  decisions,  more  effective  policies,  more 
innovative  and  useful  services,  and  generally  can  make  our  lives  better,  while 
fueling  economic  growth  and  productivity.  Some  of  this  value  creation  can  be 
measured   in  monetary  terms,   while  in  other   ways   it   is   almost   intangible. 
Researching and documenting this rich variety of value creation has been at the 
heart of the work of the Open Data Institute (ODI), from our 2015 report Open data 
means business,
1
 to our recent collaboration with the Bennett Institute for Public 
Policy.
2
 
We also know from countless examples that data can cause harms, and that trust 
and  trustworthiness  is  a  key  to  enabling  this  creation  of  value.  Fear  of  harms 
caused by the use and misuse of data can lead people to opt out of data collection 
or avoid using services; organisations may avoid collecting, using or sharing data 
to avoid risks. 
One  part  of  the  equation  has  until  now  been  elusive:  can  we  quantify  the 
importance of trust on the potential value of data? Can we get a better sense of 
how much trust – or lack thereof – impacts the value created by data flows? 
This is a hard question to answer: trust is complex, and so is its impact on the value 
of data. But it is a question worth exploring: understanding the economic value of 
trust   in   data   ecosystems   would   help   policymakers   and   companies   justify 
investment   in   activities   that   assess,   build,   and   demonstrate   trust   and 
trustworthiness. 
We  are  therefore  delighted  to  introduce  this  work  by  economics  consultancy 
Frontier Economics, commissioned by the ODI as part of the InnovateUK-funded 
‘Data innovation for the UK: research and development’ programme,
3
 and which 
took  on  the  challenge  to  explore  this  topic  with  us,  rigorously  reviewing  existing 
evidence  and  proposing  an  economic  model  of  the  impact  of  trust  on  data 
ecosystems.  
- Jeni Tennison, Vice President and Chief Strategy Advisor, ODI. 
 
 
1
  https://theodi.org/article/open-data-means-business/  
2
  https://theodi.org/article/the-value-of-data/  
3
  https://theodi.org/project/data-innovation-for-uk-research-and-development/  

 
frontier economics  6 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Data   is   abundant   in  the   modern  world. Many   emerging   technologies  and 
ecosystems  rely on  high-quality  information.  If  used  effectively, data can drive 
productivity and inclusion. However, data is not always held by the party that can 
realise these benefits and data sharing does not always happen. Trust is important 
in this context. It needs to be maintained between parties who collect and use data. 
Mistrust reduces the positive economic and social value that can be generated. 
The Open  Data Institute  (ODI)  commissioned  Frontier  Economics to  conduct  an 
evaluation  of  the economic  impact  of  trust  in  data  ecosystems.  In particular,  we 
examined  the impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing,  collection  and  use  within  a  data 
ecosystem  and  the  economic  value  that  can  be  attributed  to  trust.  Our  work 
addressed  an  important  gap  in  the current  evidence  base and  complimented 
ongoing research exploring mechanisms to improve trust around data. 
We designed an economic framework to describe the effect of increased trust on 
data sharing, collection and use and the subsequent economic and social benefits 
that  can  be realised. We  have  calibrated  this  framework  based  on  an  extensive 
review of academic evidence which quantifies the impact of trust on data sharing. 
Finally, we used key estimates from the literature on the economic value of data to 
assess, at a high level, the economic impact of trust in data ecosystems.  
Our work examined both the impact of trust on organisational and individual data 
sharing. However, our research revealed that the volume of available quantifiable 
evidence  tends  to  be  more  skewed  towards the  latter.  Nonetheless,  our  results 
tentatively suggest there is currently no strong reason to expect any difference in 
the impact of organisational versus individual trust on data sharing. Our calibration 
of existing survey evidence revealed that, on average, a 1 point increase on a 5 
point trust scale leads to a 0.27 point increase on a 5 point data-sharing scale.  
This  aggregate  result  suggests that  even  large  increases  in  trust  will only 
correspond  to  moderate  impacts  on  willingness  to  share  data.  This  emphasises 
that there are many factors, alongside trust, which affect data sharing. Increasing 
trust without addressing other factors is unlikely to be sufficient. To reach optimal 
levels of data sharing it is likely that data-sharing infrastructure would need to be 
improved and access mechanisms would have to be addressed. 
Linking  these estimates  to  the  academic  and policy  literature  of  the social  and 
economic impact of data access and sharing allows us to estimate the economic 
impact of trust in data ecosystems. This high-level estimation suggests that a 25% 
increase in data sharing could generate an additional 47.3 to 118.3 billion US$ in 
the world’s 20 largest economies. Clearly, this will affect certain ecosystems more 
than others as the importance of trust in determining data sharing varies. It is worth 
noting that most of the studies which examine the economic value of data sharing 
focus  on  organisations  sharing  and  re-sharing  data  (rather than  individual  data 
sharing).  This does lead  to  some  additional  uncertainty  as the  majority of  our 
quantified evidence on the impact of trust on data sharing is at the individual level. 
We explored in which circumstances trust is likely to have a larger or smaller effect 
on data flows by conducting a set of semi-structured interviews with actors active 
in the healthcare and financial services data ecosystems. Triangulation between 

 
frontier economics  7 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
academic evidence and interview insights revealed that the impact of trust tends 
to be larger where initial levels of trust are low. In these cases, timely intervention 
to build trust is vital. Norms and unwritten attitudes play a key role in determining 
baseline  levels  of  trust. These are likely to vary based on both individuals’ an 
organisations’ cultural background. In  addition,  contextual  factors  are  crucial  to 
understanding  the  role  of trust  in  influencing  data  sharing. For  example, sharing 
more sensitive forms of data would require higher levels of trust. 
Finally, we examined shocks to trust in real-life settings (‘natural experiments’) by 
selecting  instances  where  trust  was  eroded  or  regulations  increased trust.  This 
enabled us to test the dynamic impact of trust on data-sharing behaviour and get 
closer to identifying a causal relationship between trust and data sharing.  
In all  cases  analysed,  a  breach of trust  caused  a  decrease  in  the  number  of 
individuals  willing  to  share  data  with the  institutions  involved  in  the  breach.  We 
explored what might be driving the persistence of impacts as part of our qualitative 
engagements. Stakeholders suggested that a loss of trust is likely to have longer-
lasting consequences if the affected organisation is driven by commercial motives 
and if the scale of the problem is concealed at first. Negative impacts tend to be 
more  transitory  if  the  affected  institution  made  an  error  rather  than intentionally 
deceiving for commercial reasons, and can visibly and promptly rectify the issue. 
Conversely, policy interventions aimed at increasing trust (e.g. GDPR) can have 
positive impacts on the level of data sharing for both individuals and organisations, 
but  these  benefits  tend  to increase over  time  and can  involve an  initial  cost  for 
organisations which have to comply to prove their trustworthiness. 
On  the  whole,  this  research  suggests  there  is  robust  quantified  evidence  that 
greater  trust  is  associated  with  increased  data  sharing.  This  confirms  existing 
anecdotal  evidence  and  justifies  ongoing  efforts  to  design  mechanisms  to  boost 
trust. In some cases where there is scope to achieve significant improvements in 
trust, the relevant effect size will be large.  
However,  the  average  magnitude  of  the  relationship  between  trust  and  data 
sharing suggests that boosting trust will have to be accompanied by a suite of other 
interventions  (enabling  greater  discoverability  of  data, for  example)  in  order  for 
data sharing to reach its optimal level. Exploring wider determinants of data sharing 
and how they can complement increases in trust will be an important area for future 
research. Context is also extremely important in determining the impact of changes 
in trust. The specific trust linkages and their maturity matter. 
Whilst there is robust evidence on the importance of trust in data ecosystems, our 
research identified key gaps in the existing evidence, which make it challenging to 
link our core findings on the impact of trust on data sharing to the wider literature 
on  the  economic  impact  of  data  sharing,  collection  and  use.  In  particular,  a 
relatively small set of papers in our sample examine the actual impact of trust on 
data sharing using a quantified approach, mostly focusing on individuals sharing 
data  about  themselves. Less  quantified  evidence  is  available  on organisational 
trust  linkages  and  data  sharing. Conversely, the  majority  of  the  evidence  which 
assesses  the  impact  of  data  sharing  on  economic  outcomes  is  focused  on 
organisational  data  sharing. Adding  to  these existing  evidence  bases will  allow 
future work to determine how the economic value of trust varies across different 
activities as well as different relationships. 

 
frontier economics  8 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
1 BACKGROUND & METHODOLOGY 
1.1 Context 
1.1.1 Trust in data ecosystems 
The role of trust 
A successful end state for a data ecosystem is a ‘farmland for data’, where data is 
used in a way that creates positive impact: driving productivity, boosting research 
and innovation, and increasing inclusion and welfare.
4
  
Achieving this desirable end state involves navigating a path between a ‘wasteland 
for  data’ where  data sharing  and use  is limited  due  to  mistrust and  there  are 
substantial fears regarding ethics and equity in the use of data; and an ‘oil field for 
data’ where  data  is  hoarded  and  used  for  competitive  advantage,  limiting  the 
potential for innovation and capabilities to grow. 
Trust is a critical enabler of a ‘farmland for data’ ecosystem – in order for data to 
flow optimally within an ecosystem allowing for its full potential to be realised. There 
are multiple actors within any single data ecosystem. This implies that trust needs 
to exist between several different ecosystem participants: 
 those  who  contribute  information  to  a  data  set need to  place  trust  in  the 
organisations they share data with;  
 organisations who are responsible for collecting, managing or ensuring access 
to data need to prove their trustworthiness to carry out that role in a capable 
and ethical way; 
 data users need to trust the validity of the data to derive value from it by creating 
products, services and insights; and  
 the communities in and around the data ecosystem, such as the general public 
who need to understand the importance of trust in allowing flows of data and 
therefore extracting value from the data ecosystem.  
In  turn, mistrust  between these  different groups hinders  the  potential for data  to 
flow within the ecosystem and the positive economic and social value of data as a 
result. 
Prominence of trust  
Evidence suggests that trust is a critical factor enabling an open and trustworthy 
data ecosystem. A recent survey conducted by ODI and YouGov found that nearly 
9 in 10 people (87%) feel it is important or very important that organisations they 
interact with use data about them ethically.
5
  
 
 
4
  https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/our-vision-and-manifesto/our-theory-of-change/  
5
  https://theodi.org/article/odi-survey-reveals-british-consumer-attitudes-to-sharing-personal-data/  
 https://theodi.org/article/nearly-9-in-10-people-think-its-important-that-organisations-use-personal-data-
ethically/ 

 
frontier economics  9 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
However,  this  evidence also suggests that  a low  proportion  of  the  general 
population    trusts a    number    of organisational types with    ethical    data 
practices/collecting  personal  data.  For  example,  social  media  sites are seen  as 
being the least trustworthy and healthcare institutions the most trustworthy when 
handling data.
6
 This suggests that current levels of trust and trustworthiness tend 
to be very context-dependent. Factors influencing trust in an ecosystem include: 
 the  maturity  of  the  ecosystem – baseline  trust  tends  to  be  lower  for  nascent 
ecosystems, and higher for established ones; and 
 the  understanding  and  awareness  of data-sharing practices within  a  certain 
ecosystem.
7
  
Ethics  around  data-sharing  practices has  become  a  prominent  issue  in  recent 
years, as organisations increasingly rely on data to improve the way they work and 
consumers  are  able  to  access  increasingly  targeted  and  personalised  services 
based on their data.  
In parallel, people’s awareness about their data rights and the potential for misuse 
of personal data and data breaches has increased. This has in part been driven by 
the rollout of regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 
the ongoing debate on the regulation of big tech and widespread media coverage 
of events like the Cambridge Analytica and Facebook incidents.
8
 
1.1.2 Role of ODI 
The  mission  of  the  Open  Data  Institute  (ODI)  is  to  work  with  companies  and 
governments to build an open, trustworthy data ecosystem. 
The ODI is currently engaged in research to develop the next generation of public 
and private services. This involves applying ethical considerations into how data is 
collected, managed and used. 
One strand of the ODI’s research is focused on exploring which mechanisms are 
likely  to  have  the  most  impact  in  improving  trust  between  organisations  around 
data. Some of the ODI work in this area investigates:  
 the levers through which trust in data ecosystems can be enhanced;
9
 
 the ways in which organisations can demonstrate trustworthiness when sharing 
data;
10
 and 
 the value of sharing data to build trust and trustworthiness.
11
 
Another key strand of the ODI’s research focuses on the value of sharing data, 
both in the private and public sector.
12
  
 
 
6
  https://theodi.org/article/nearly-9-in-10-people-think-its-important-that-organisations-use-personal-data-
ethically/  
7
  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2019-2024/vestager/announcements/speech-executive-
vice-president-margrethe-vestager-building-trust-technology_en  
8
  https://theodi.org/article/nearly-9-in-10-people-think-its-important-that-organisations-use-personal-data-
ethically/  
9
  https://theodi.org/project/building-trust-through-audit-and-certification/ 
10
  https://theodi.org/article/demonstrating-and-assessing-trustworthiness-when-sharing-data/  
11
  https://theodi.org/article/case-study-the-value-of-sharing-data-to-build-trust/  
12
  https://theodi.org/project/the-value-of-data-sharing-in-the-private-sector/#1586850452070-39243495-0d94  

 
frontier economics  10 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
1.1.3 Research question 
Frontier  were  asked  to  assess  the  relationship  between  trust  and  the  sharing, 
collection and use of data: what is the economic impact of increased trust in a 
data ecosystem? 
Beyond  the  work  developed  by  the  ODI  and  their  collaborators,  there  is  a 
substantial literature exploring the mechanisms through which trustworthiness and 
trust can be established and maintained within data ecosystems. Likewise, a large 
volume   of academic   and   policy   research   has   been   recently   devoted   to 
understanding  the  relationship  between  data  sharing,  collection  and  use  and 
economic impact. 
Figure 1 The relationship of interest 
 
Source: Frontier Economics  
Our work has explored a key evidence gap connecting these two literatures: the 
ways in which trust and trustworthiness enable the sharing, collection and use of 
data  in  a  given  ecosystem. There  is  strong  theoretical  and  anecdotal  evidence 
supporting this relationship and disparate academic studies which have quantified 
this  relationship  in  a  number  of  different  ways. In this  study, we  have rigorously 
synthesised available evidence in a consistent way to validate key hypotheses of 
interest.  
After  validating  and  testing  the  relationship  between  trust  and  data  sharing, 
collection and use, we have linked these findings to existing work on the economic 
value  of data  access  and  sharing. This has  allowed  us  to conduct  a  high-level 
assessment of the economic impact of trust in data ecosystems.  
By conducting an in-depth analysis of existing strands of literature and comparing 
evidence on  trust  and  the economic value  of  data,  this  research has  made an 
important first step towards answering the research question originally set out by 
the ODI.  
While our attempts to synthesise, compare and link existing evidence has enabled 
us to generate valuable preliminary results on the economic impact of trust in data 
ecosystems, our  research has  also  highlighted some key  gaps  in  the existing 
evidence base. These gaps make it challenging to draw definitive conclusions on 
the economic impact of trust in a data ecosystem, but serve as a guide to direct 
future research efforts.  
The following section sets out the approach we adopted to answer the research 
question.  
1.2 Approach 
We have implemented a 5-step approach to address the ODI’s questions. We have 
illustrated  this  methodology  in Figure 2 below  and  provided  further  detail in  the 
following sub-sections.   

 
frontier economics  11 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 2 Overview of methodology 
 
1.2.1 Stage 1. Literature review 
At the core of our approach is a review of the evidence that uses empirical methods 
to quantify the relationship between trust in data ecosystems, and the amount of 
data sharing, collection and use that takes place in those ecosystems.  
We  implemented  a  rigorous search  strategy to  identify  a  wide  pool  of  available 
studies which explored the relationship between trust and data sharing. We then 
ranked these studies based on relevance to our research question and robustness 
of the study’s methodology. 
In addition to exploring existing evidence on the aggregate effect of trust, we also 
investigated the  contextual factors that make trust more  or  less  important to the 
functioning of data ecosystems, such as the type of actors and audiences within a 
certain ecosystem. This has helped to highlight areas for further research. 
The search strategy 
Our comprehensive review of the available literature started with the development 
of a codified search strategy to identify a broad range of academic studies. This 
strategy  set out  the  type  and  fields  of  literature that  we  were  to review,  the 
databases that we were to search and the search terms that we would apply, as 
well as any relevant exclusion criteria.  
We wanted to include publications from multiple disciplines including economics, 
policy,  computer  science,  social  science  and  ethics/applied  philosophy. We 
therefore used   both   discipline-specific databases   (RePEc   and   EconLit   for 
economic literature) and generic academic databases (JSTOR and ScienceDirect 
for multi-disciplinary literature) to identify existing studies. 
Our  search  terms  included multiple  combinations  of ‘trust’ (or  synonyms)  AND 
‘data’ OR ‘data  sharing’ OR ‘data  collection’ OR ‘data  use’ to  identify  academic 
studies as well as research papers and policy articles. 
We augmented our rigorous review of publicly available academic evidence with 
additional insights  from  relevant  grey  literature.  These  articles  and  reports  were 
identified based on domain knowledge within our team and the ODI’s suggestions. 
We have included further detail on our search strategy in Annex A. 

 
frontier economics  12 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Categories of relevant research identified 
There are several ways in which the impact of trust on data sharing is quantified in 
the identified literature: 
 Empirical  survey  evidence. The  most  common  form  of  quantification  is  via 
surveys. In  these  surveys,  participants  value  the  importance  of trust and 
describe their willingness to provide information using Likert scales.
13
 Based on 
the survey data collected, the studies then quantify the impact of trust on data 
sharing using multivariate regression techniques (in an attempt to isolate the 
impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing  as  separate  to  the  impact  of  confounding 
factors).
14
 For  this  type  of  evidence,  observed  correlations  can  be  computed 
and  compared  in  different  contexts,  but  the  direction  of  causality  may  not 
always be clear. In particular, while survey results are informative to evaluate 
the  magnitude  of  the  relationship  between  trust  and  data  sharing,  coefficient 
estimates might suffer from reverse causality: On the one hand, greater levels 
of  trust  might  lead  to  more  data  sharing  in  a  given ecosystem,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  possible  that people  who  are  more  willing  to  share  data  are more 
inclined to display general attitudes of trust. 
 Natural  experiments. It  is  possible  to  exploit  major  shocks  to  trust  and 
examine  data  sharing and use  before  and  after. For  example,  the  advent  of 
GDPR or a major data incident could both impact trust. The resulting evidence 
is  more  likely  to  be  causal  in  nature  but  may  not  always  be  applicable  more 
widely. 
 Theoretical  models. The  value  of  trust is  also quantified  using  conceptual 
game  theory  models  which  include  assumptions  and  parameter  values.
15
 
These  models  use  mathematical  modelling  to  explore  strategic  interactions 
between  different  decision-making  entities. For  example,  models  can  be 
developed  which  attempt  to  predict  the  behaviour  of  suppliers  and  retailers 
given different levels of trust in forecasted demand.  
In general, the survey evidence relates to stated preferences with regards to data 
sharing and  its  drivers.  The  natural  experiments  provide  an  indication  of actual 
behaviour following  a  shock  to  trust. Examining  actions  rather  than  intentions  is 
usually  more  reliable.  However,  in  this  context  there  may  be  examples  where 
additional information is contained in the attitudinal information. For example: 
 just because you are a customer of one bank (and therefore share data with it) 
does not necessarily mean that you trust it more than alternatives. Your choice 
of bank could have been driven by a range of other factors; and/or 
 you might state you do not trust a particular organisation (e.g. a social media 
network)  but  continue  to  use and  share  data  with it as  the  benefits  it  offers 
outweigh the potential risks. 
 
 
13
    Likert scales are psychometric scales which allow respondents to specify their level of agreement or 
disagreement on a symmetric agree-disagree scale. 
14
  These techniques are typically more informative than simple bivariate correlation.  
15
  For example, agents are assumed to behave rationally or seek to maximise their utility/profits. 

 
frontier economics  13 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
To account for this, our quantification methodology relies on the use of both survey 
evidence   and natural   experiments. These   two   types   of   evidence are 
complementary (see further detail below).  
Volume of relevant research identified 
In  total, we  identified  87 potentially  relevant  studies. Based  on a  more thorough 
review, we classified these papers  into  three  categories: high,  medium  and  low 
relevance. In Figure 3 below  we explain in  detail  the  criteria  we  used  for  this 
classification approach and set out the number of papers that fell in each category. 
In  general,  more  robust,  relevant  and  recent  studies  were  classified  as  higher 
relevance. 
Figure 3 Evidence relevance ranking 
Relevance 
ranking 
Number of 
studies 
Criteria for ranking 
High 21 
 the research question is highly relevant to inform the 
relationship between trust, data sharing/collection/use 
and subsequent economic impacts. 
 the methodology includes an assessment of the 
impact of trust on data sharing/collection/use, or the 
economic impact of data sharing/collection/use.  
 The assessment is quantitative in almost all cases. 
Where surveys are conducted, the sample size is 
large enough to draw meaningful statistical 
conclusions. If qualitative, the assessment is highly 
rigorous and is able to isolate the impact of changes 
in trust on data sharing. 
 the type of trust linkages and types of actors under 
analysis are easily identifiable. 
 all studies were conducted post 2010. 
Medium 16 
 the research question is highly relevant to inform the 
relationship between trust, data sharing/collection/use 
and subsequent economic impacts. 
 the methodology includes an assessment of the 
impact of trust on data sharing/collection/use, or the 
economic impact of data sharing/collection/use. The 
assessment is either qualitative or quantitative. 
 the study was conducted post 2010. 
Low 50 
 the research question is relevant to inform the 
relationship between trust, data sharing/collection/use 
and subsequent economic impacts. 
 however, the study does not always include an 
assessment of the impact of trust on data 
sharing/collection/use, or the economic impact of data 
sharing/collection/use. 
 some studies in this group were conducted pre-2010. 
Source:  Frontier Economics 
For the identified 21 ‘highly relevant’ studies, we carried out a full, in-depth content 
review, considering the following dimensions: 
 research question; 
 methodology and evaluation of the study’s robustness (internal validity); 

 
frontier economics  14 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 sample size (if applicable); 
 estimate of the impact of trust on data sharing (if applicable); 
 direction of trust movement; and 
 type of trust linkage: individual to organisation, organisation to organisation or 
a combination of the two. 
When  conducting  the  review,  we  paid  particular  attention  to  which  actor  in  the 
ecosystem each study focused on: whether it investigated the willingness to share 
data (or the actual data-sharing behaviour) of an individual, of an organisation, or 
possibly both. 
Figure  4 below   reports   a  more  detailed   split of the   type   of   data-sharing 
attitude/behaviour analysed for each category of studies identified (high, medium 
and low relevance). 
Figure 4 Actor data-sharing behaviour analysed 
 Individual Organisation Both Total 
High relevance 10 7 4 21 
Medium relevance 8 5 3 16 
Low relevance  17 11 22 50 
Total 35 23 29 87 
Source:  Frontier Economics 
Note: The ‘both’ category refers to papers discussing data-sharing behaviour for multiple actors in the 
ecosystem (i.e. individuals and organisations). 
This shows that most of the publicly available literature on the relationship between 
trust  and  data  sharing  analyses  the  behaviour  of  individuals  sharing  data  about 
themselves  (35  out  of  87 studies).  Organisation-to-organisation  data  sharing  is 
also discussed in the literature. However, studies on organisational data sharing 
tend to be more qualitative in nature and do not include a quantified estimate of 
the impact of trust on data sharing.   
Assessment of reliability  
The value of our literature review depends not just on what the evidence says about 
the  impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing  and  use,  but  crucially  on  the  quality  of  the 
methods used to draw those conclusions. We have placed higher weight on higher-
quality evidence
16
 that is relevant to the research question under consideration. 
To consider the robustness of each quantitative study that we identified, we drew 
on  an  approach  in keeping  with the Maryland  Scientific  Methods  Scale (SMS).
17
 
The SMS is widely used within government and includes a five-point (1 to 5) scale. 
Higher scores indicate that a study has used a relatively more reliable approach 
when developing a counterfactual. In Figure 5 below we present an example of the 
type of evidence that would fall under each category.  
 
 
16
  Quality in this case is primarily based on internal validity, which refers to the extent to which research 
methods applied in a certain study and subsequent results provide an adequate reflection of the true 
relationship under analysis and are not due to methodological errors. 
17
  The original SMS was developed by Sherman et al. (1998), https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles/171676.PDF  

 
frontier economics  15 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 5 Maryland Scientific Methods   Scale   to   review   validity   of 
quantitative evidence 
 
Source: Frontier Economics, adapted from What Works Centre for Local Growth, 
http://www.whatworksgrowth.org/public/files/Scoring-Guide.pdf  
The specific language used in the Maryland SMS is not appropriate for all of the 
quantitative  evidence  we uncovered. However, we have  been  guided  by  the 
principles  embedded  within  the  scale  in  order  to  compare  the  robustness  of 
different quantitative estimates. These principles and areas we considered include:  
 data sources used;  
 sample size;  
 granularity of impact; and 
 extent  to  which  the  study  has  accounted  for  other  differences  between  the 
treatment and control groups.  
To  assess  the relevance  and  robustness  of qualitative  and  theoretical  evidence, 
we considered the extent to which the study is able to isolate the impact of changes 
in  trust  on  data  sharing,  either  through  theoretical  modelling  or  through  semi-
structured qualitative interviews. 
As outlined above, some of the academic literature identified focuses on analysing 
the impact that major shocks to trust (which we refer to as ‘natural experiments’) 
had on data sharing. The literature analyses the impact of both negative shocks to 
trust, e.g. the Cambridge Analytica incident, and positive shocks to trust driven by 
regulations, e.g. GDPR. 
To test the robustness of the results arising from this evidence, we looked into a 
wider  set  of  natural  experiments  (either  negative  or  positive  shocks  to  trust)  in 
different sectors (for example, healthcare and banking), and any related evidence 
that  suggests  what  the  impact  of the  shock  might  have  been. Further  detail  is 
provided in Annex A. 
1.2.2 Stage 2. Develop a structured theoretical framework 
During  the second stage  of  the  study  we developed a  structured  theoretical 
framework which describes the channels through which trust drives data sharing, 
and the factors that make trust more or less important. This includes two high-level 
components:  
 Conceptualising trust: 

 
frontier economics  16 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
□ definition of trust in the context of data ecosystems; 
□ setting out the main drivers of trustworthiness and of trust;  
□ exploring the contextual factors which determine where trust is more or less 
important in enabling data sharing. 
 Defining a theory of change which links trust to data sharing and ultimately 
economic impact, using a logic model framework. 
The  conceptualisation  of  trust  draws  from  an  existing  trust  model  designed  by 
O’Hara (2012) and applied by the ODI in recently published research.
18
 The theory 
of change has been designed using a logic model framework, a technique widely 
adopted to identify, describe and arrange the key aspects of an intervention and 
represent how the intervention produces change.
19
  
Developing a robust economic framework to describe the channels through which 
trust drives data flows and in turn generates economic and social value ensures 
the evaluation is grounded in economic theory. 
1.2.3 Stage 3. Calibrating the framework 
We then assessed the sign, size and significance of the conceptual relationships 
articulated in Stage 2 by quantifying the aggregate impact of trust on data sharing. 
This validation was based entirely on the quantitative evidence that we identified 
as part of our literature review. 
Our ability to quantify the nature and the strength of these conceptual relationships 
depended on the base of existing evidence. It was not possible to split out effects 
according to each channel and theory of change we articulated in the conceptual 
framework. For  example,  the existing  evidence  did  not  always  discriminate 
between specific activities (e.g. data collection vs. data use) or different actors (e.g. 
data institution vs. data subject). We carried out the framework calibration exercise 
in three steps, each described below. 
Step 1: assess the sign and magnitude of the relationship 
First, we compared estimates from the academic evidence review to measure the 
aggregate relationship  between  trust  and  data  sharing,  collection and use. 
Available academic literature enabled us to assess: 
 whether the relationship between trust and data sharing is positive (as would 
be expected based on our conceptual framework); and  
 what is the order of magnitude of the relationship (how small or large the impact 
of trust on data sharing could be).  
 
 
18
  https://theodi.org/article/designing-trustworthy-data-institutions-report/  
19
  While our research objective is to describe the impact of trust rather than of a specific intervention, it still 
provides for a useful framework to distil the key ways in which trust can lead to greater data sharing and 
wider economic and social value. 

 
frontier economics  17 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Step 2: test the direction of causality 
While most evidence from existing academic studies on trust in data ecosystems 
has informed the sign and magnitude of the relationship, it cannot provide a causal 
estimate of trust on data sharing, collection and use. This is because most research 
to  date  tests  the  impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing  through  surveys,  i.e.  measures 
respondents’  self-reported  levels  of  trust,  willingness  to  share  data,  and  then 
analyses the impact of trust on data sharing performing a regression or correlation 
analysis on survey data. 
As such, surveys are unable to assess the impact of trust on actual data-sharing 
behaviour. Surveys also tend to record preferences at a specific point in time (i.e. 
the evidence is cross-sectional) without capturing changes in behaviour over time. 
This makes it challenging to disentangle cause and effect when comparing these 
type of studies.  
Therefore, we adopted a different approach to test whether changes in trust have 
an impact on data-sharing behaviour. The main objective of this assessment was 
to test that the direction of causality is in line with our expectations, i.e. isolating 
the  impact  that  trust  has on data  sharing  from  any  reverse  effects  or  feedback 
loops  (e.g.  in  some  ecosystems  where  there  are  greater  levels  of  data  sharing, 
actors might be more willing to trust each other with data).   
We did so by looking into both academic (where available) and anecdotal evidence 
on a set of major shocks to trust in real-life settings (i.e. ‘natural experiments’), by 
selecting  a  number  of  relevant  instances  of  negative  shocks  to  trust,  i.e.  where 
trust  was suddenly eroded  because  of  an  incident  or  a  data  breach  (e.g.  the 
Cambridge Analytica and Care.data incidents), or, conversely, positive shocks to 
trust, i.e. where regulations were introduced to increase trustworthiness and trust 
(e.g. the GDPR).
20
  
Step 3: link to economic impacts 
Finally, we linked the aggregate estimates on the impact of trust on data sharing 
to  the  wider  literature  on  the  economic  impact  of  sharing  and  using  data.  This 
enabled us to provide an indicative estimate of the economic impact of trust in data 
ecosystems. 
1.2.4 Stage 4. Case studies to validate the framework 
We carried out five semi-structured interviews, organised in two case studies, to 
test and contextualise the empirical evidence.  
Firstly, we selected case study sectors in conjunction with the ODI. We wanted to 
explore  the  role  of  trust  in  facilitating  greater  data  sharing  within  two  different 
contexts and ecosystems. We focused on: 
 the role  played  by  trust  in  facilitating  the  use  of  patient  data  as  an  input  to 
healthcare research; and 
 
 
20
  Academic evidence was available on some of these natural experiments. For other natural experiments 
where academic evidence was not available, we have gathered anecdotal evidence and ad-hoc statistics 
from news articles. We have placed more weight on the academic evidence.  

 
frontier economics  18 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 the impact of trust on data sharing in the context of Open Banking. 
The type of information that is exchanged in these two ecosystems is very different 
as  are  the  specific  organisational  types  involved.  This variation  allowed  us  to 
consider trust from a variety of different perspectives.  
We used the interviews to consider a number of specific issues in depth: 
 validation of our conceptual trust framework and theory of change;  
 exploration of the role of trust in different ecosystems; 
 consideration   of   a   possible   distinction   between   creating   trust   in   new 
ecosystems versus maintaining trust in more established ecosystems; and 
 real-world   examples   of changes   in   trust   and   their   direct   and   indirect 
ramifications on data sharing. 
The insights gathered from this qualitative engagement are presented in Sections 
2 and 3. 
1.2.5 Stage 5. Reporting 
This report summarises all of the work we have undertaken and the conclusions 
we have reached. Staff at the ODI met and corresponded with Frontier Economics 
regularly in order to develop and steer this research project and provided feedback 
on an earlier draft of this report.  
The remainder of the report is structured as follows: 
 in Section 2 we set out our conceptual framework; 
 in  Section 3 we  present  the  results  of  our  framework  quantification  and 
qualitative validation; and 
 in Section 4 we conclude and summarise key results.   

 
frontier economics  19 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
2 ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK 
In this section we define trust in the context of data ecosystems. We also set out 
conceptually: 
 how trust can impact data sharing, collection and use; and 
 the  economic  and  social  value  added  associated with greater  data  sharing, 
collection and use. 
2.1 Modelling trust in a data ecosystem 
To  determine  how  trust  impacts  data  sharing,  the  first  building  block  of  our 
economic  framework sets  out what  we  mean  by  a  data  ecosystem  and an 
appropriate definition of the role of trust in that context. 
2.1.1 The data ecosystem 
To distil the key determinants of trust and trustworthiness in a data ecosystem, we 
need  to  consider what  we  refer  to  as a data  ecosystem in the  context  of  this 
research, and which actors are going to interact and form relationships within that 
ecosystem. 
As  defined  by  the  ODI’s  Data  Ecosystem  Mapping  methodology,
21
 a  data 
ecosystem  consists  of  data  infrastructure,  and  the  people,  communities  and 
organisations that benefit from the value created by it. Data infrastructure in this 
context  is  made  up  of  data  assets,  standards,  technologies,  policies  and  the 
organisations that steward and contribute to them. 
Our work explores the trust linkages between a set of activities within a typical data 
ecosystem as we illustrate below (Figure 6).
22
 
Figure 6 Ecosystem actors
23
 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
 
 
21
  http://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/ODI-Data-Ecosystem-Mapping-A1-fold-to-A5-2019-1.pdf  
22
  https://theodi.org/article/mapping-data-ecosystems/  
23
  Additionally, the data ecosystem includes re-users, end users, capacity developers and technology 
providers. 

 
frontier economics  20 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 
 Contributing to data: data subjects contribute to the dataset, either knowingly 
or unknowingly through use of a service. Data contributors’ trust towards other 
actors in the ecosystem ensures they feel comfortable sharing their data;  
 Data  stewarding: certain  ecosystem  participants collect,  manage or  ensure 
access  to  a  dataset.  These  actors need  to  prove  their  trustworthiness  to  the 
parties they exchange data with; 
 Data use involves the creation of things, products, services, analyses, insights, 
stories  or  visualisations.  These  actors  want  to  determine  that  the  data  is 
trustworthy and accurate before engaging. 
In addition, benefits from data ecosystems can accrue to actors who are able to 
make better decisions. They therefore benefit from a high level of trust within an 
ecosystem as it increases the confidence with which they can act. 
2.1.2 Defining trust in data ecosystems 
Definition of trust 
The   academic   literature   offers various   frameworks   for   describing   trust, 
trustworthiness  and  what  it  means  to  be  trusted in different  settings.  These 
frameworks break trust down into key components such as ‘credibility’ ‘reliability’ 
and ‘competence’.
24
 
Several academic studies attempt to pin down what trust means in the context of 
data ecosystems. Gupta (2015) defines trust as the “willingness of a party to be 
vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the expectation that the other 
will perform a particular action”.
25
 
Therefore,  trust can partially  determine  the  degree  to  which  individuals  and 
organisations are willing to enter into agreements with each other. It also influences 
how actors behave towards other ecosystem participants. As a result, trust is going 
to impact on how data is exchanged within a given ecosystem. 
To  distil  the  key  elements  of  trust  in  a  data  ecosystem,  this study builds  on  the 
previous  work  by O’Hara (2012)
26
 and  the  ODI  (2020)
27
 which  has  made  a  
distinction between trust and trustworthiness. Being trustworthy is different from 
being trusted, and the two must be aligned to avoid a breakdown of trust.
28
 Placing 
trust in an actor when it is not trustworthy can lead to a loss of trust following an 
unexpected  event.  For  example,  this  can  happen  through misrepresentation, 
where a  data institution  provides data  contributors  with  assurances  about  data 
 
 
24
  Other components identified by academic studies are “intimacy and self-orientation”  
https://trustedadvisor.com/why-trust-matters/understanding-trust/understanding-the-trust-equation and 
“honesty, competency and reliability” or “rigorous logic, authenticity and empathy” 
https://www.thebritishacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Trust-Trustworthiness-Transparency.pdfb  
25
  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/dddmp.2015.32  
26
  https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/341800/1/ohara_trust_working_paper_aug_2012.pdf  
27
  https://theodi.org/article/designing-trustworthy-data-institutions-report/  
28
  http://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/OPEN_Designing-trustworthy-data-institutions_ODI_2020.pdf  

 
frontier economics  21 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
protection, but does not have adequate security measures in place, which comes 
to light when a data breach occurs. 
In  the  remainder  of  our  work we generally  consider trustworthiness  as  a 
precondition to build trust. At a high level, this means an actor in the ecosystem 
needs to prove their trustworthiness in order for another ecosystem participants to 
share their own data or use the information provided. 
Despite this characterisation, we acknowledge the complexity and dynamic nature 
of the relationship between trust and trustworthiness. While trustworthiness is often 
a precondition to build trust, it can also be the case that some elements of trust are 
necessary  to  build  trustworthiness  (making  the  relationship  between  trust  and 
trustworthiness bi-directional). For example, in some cases data contributors may 
decide  to  share  their  data  with  a  new  ecosystem  player  offering  an  innovative 
service, before the player is able to build a reputation of trustworthiness (due to a 
commercial urgency for example). If the data handling and corresponding service 
provision is considered satisfactory, then trust can grow over time. 
Components of trustworthiness 
An actor’s trustworthiness can be measured along multiple dimensions, including 
its ability, willingness and motivation to deliver on its promises.
29
 These dimensions 
are going  to  depend  on  the  specific  circumstances  in  which  claims,  actions  and 
commitments to trustworthiness are made, and also the counterparties with which 
an actor interacts within the ecosystem. 
In addition to this, trustworthiness is going to be influenced both by internal drivers 
(e.g. reputation, presence of a pre-existing trust relationship) and external drivers 
(e.g.  laws  and  regulations).
30
 While  factors  such  as  regulations  and  codes  of 
conduct are typically mandated externally, actors still have some agency on them 
(for  example,  they  can  choose  to obtain an  external  certification  or  subject 
themselves to audit).  
Drivers of trust toward sharing and using data 
The willingness and ability of individuals or organisations to place trust in another 
organisation varies based on the type of actor and data involved. (E.g. perceived 
privacy and security concerns will be greater when personal data is involved or one 
party’s motives are commercial rather than altruistic. These factors may magnify 
the importance of trust.)  
As  articulated  by  Gupta  (2015), the  role  of trust in  determining  data sharing  is 
influenced by: 
 Perceived security. Security corresponds to concerns about the protection of 
personal  information  with  three  specific  goals: ensuring information  is  not 
altered during transit and storage; verification of a user’s identity and eligibility 
for  data  access; and  confidentiality requiring that  data  use  be  confined  to 
authorised purposes by authorised people. 
 
 
29
  http://theodi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/OPEN_Designing-trustworthy-data-institutions_ODI_2020.pdf  
30
  Although these drivers originate externally, there is also an internal element that determines how effective 
the driver is in increasing trust and trustworthiness (i.e. the way organisations respond to them). 

 
frontier economics  22 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 Perceived privacy. Privacy is defined as a process of anonymity preservation 
and is strongly connected to control over information about the self (i.e. in online 
environments, users who perceive higher threats to their privacy are less likely 
to  disclose  personal  data, they  feel  less  able  to  control  it  and  protect 
themselves).
31
 
Gupta  (2015)  suggests  that  both  perceived  security  and  privacy  are  relevant 
drivers of trust: if actors have control over their information flow and protection over 
their privacy, this will increase the likelihood they place trust in their counterparties 
and share more data within the ecosystem. 
Other studies
32
 point to perceived usefulness as another driving factor for trust in 
a data ecosystem. If an actor in the ecosystem feels that sharing their data will lead 
to  a  positive  outcome  for  themselves  (e.g.  receiving  a  high-quality  product  in 
exchange for their data) or for society (e.g. medical data used for research), that 
is,  if  data  sharing  is  perceived  to  be  useful,  this  is  also  likely  to  increase  the 
probability that the actor will place trust in their counterparty and share their data 
with them. 
2.1.3 Where trust is more or less important in a data ecosystem 
In addition to the above, the incentives to be trustworthy or to place trust in other 
actors are going to vary based on the context of a particular data ecosystem, as 
highlighted in recently published work by the ODI.
33
 
For example, trustworthiness often assumes a different meaning for organisations 
working in different sectors. This is because different sectors have different rules 
governing  ethics  and  trustworthiness  around  use  of  data,  and  different  sectors 
value data use in different ways. There are also likely to be differences between 
more   mature   ecosystems,   which   are able   to leverage   pre-existing trust 
relationships, and newer ecosystems, where trust relationships have yet to be built.  
Therefore,  in  addition  to  exploring  the  aggregate  effect  of  trust,  we  set  out  the 
factors  that the  literature  suggests make  trust  more  or less  important  to  the 
functioning of data ecosystems. 
 Type  of  actor  in  the  data  ecosystem. Trust  might  have  a  different  role  in 
enabling the sharing of data between different actors in the ecosystem, such 
as data institutions (or stewards), data contributors (or subjects), data users (or 
creators), and other  stakeholders. The  importance  of  trust  in  an  ecosystem 
might also vary when  the  data  exchange  is  between  an  individual  and  an 
organisation  relative  to when it  is  between  two  organisations. Finally,  trust 
might be more difficult to generate if an actor is seen to be motivated by self-
interest and commercial outcomes rather than the public good. 
 
 
31
  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/dddmp.2015.32  
32
  For example, Rissman (2019) https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0264837719301000  
33
  https://theodi.org/article/demonstrating-and-assessing-trustworthiness-when-sharing-data/  

 
frontier economics  23 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 7 Data sharing behaviour 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
 
 Type  of  data  being  exchanged. The  importance  of  trust  in  an  ecosystem 
might depend on the type of data being exchanged, and especially whether it 
is personal or non-personal in nature. 
 Wider context. The importance of trust might also depend on economic and 
social  factors  affecting  the  ecosystem  (e.g.  trust  might  be  a  more  important 
enabler of data sharing in certain countries and cultural contexts than others, 
driven  by  differences  in  institutions,  regulations  and  norms  around  sharing). 
The  impact  of  trust  on data sharing  might  also  differ  between  emergent 
ecosystems and trust linkages versus previously established relationships.  
 Baseline level of trust. Throughout this work we have not assumed that the 
effect of trust on data sharing, collection and use is linear. The effect of a given 
increase of trust may be larger where initial levels of trust are low than when 
there is already a significant amount of trust between actors in the ecosystem. 
There may also be feedback loops that reinforce or balance the data ecosystem 
after a change in the level of trust. 
2.2 Logic model 
After defining the key components of trust and trustworthiness in data ecosystems, 
we used a logic model, to articulate the different channels through which: 
 trust impacts on data sharing, collection and use; and 
 the sharing, collection and use of data impacts on the economy and society. 
Logic  models  are frameworks used  to  set  out  the underlying  theory for  how 
interventions or actions are expected to generate particular outcomes and impacts. 
It is helpful to set out these stages explicitly and then examine the extent to which 
each linkage is validated by the underlying evidence. The focus of this research is 
not on a specific policy intervention but rather on the role of trust as a driver of data 
sharing,  collection  and use.  Nonetheless,  building  a  logic  model  provides  for  a 
useful framework to draw out a theory of change leading from trust to economic 
and  social  impact,  and  distil  the  main  channels  through  which  we  expect  the 
change to happen.  

 
frontier economics  24 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
We present the  full  logic model in Figure 8.  The  model  describes  how  activities 
including laws, regulations norms and standards facilitate an environment with a 
high degree of trust and trustworthiness.  
In turn, trust and trustworthiness enable greater data sharing and use. Greater data 
sharing and use then contribute to positive economic and social impacts through 
several mechanisms such as greater use of higher-quality information and more 
vibrant competition which is fostered as a result of lower entry barriers.
34
  
Each of  these mechanisms results  in  a  range  of  social  and  economic  impacts 
including individuals  and  consumers  benefiting from  higher-quality  services, and 
firms  increasing  efficiency.  We  have  also  included  a  feedback  loop  which 
represents   the   possibility   of   economic   impacts   further   boosting   trust. The 
remainder of this section expands on each column of the logic model. 
 
 
 
34
  These theories of change build on Frontier Economics research commissioned by the ODI in 2019, on the 
economic impact of open standards for data. 

 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS
 
 
frontier
 
economics
 
 
25
 
 
 
Figure 8 Impact of trust logic model  
 
Source: Frontier 
 

 
frontier economics  26 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 
2.2.1 Logic model components and theories of change 
Actions: drivers of trust 
System  of  rules exist to help ensure  institutions  are  trustworthy  when  handling 
data, which is a precondition to build trust in a data ecosystem.
35
 Some of these 
rules may be mandated by the environment present in the data ecosystem, others 
stated  by an organisation  stewarding  data itself,  or  may  be  implicit  because  of 
social or industry norms.
36
 Categories of rules include: 
 Laws and regulations (e.g. GDPR): they define the behaviours expected of an 
organisation by an authorising body; 
 Norms: implicit  or  ‘unwritten  rules’  of  behaviour dictate  unwritten  ethical 
practices; 
 Contracts: legally  enforceable  contracts  help  align  different  parties’ 
expectations; 
 Penalties: the  threat  of  penalties  ensures  a  person  or  organisation  will  be 
motivated to comply; 
 Standards: agreements ensuring that organisations adopting them will behave 
in a predictable way; 
 Codes  of  conduct: developed  by  organisations  to  signal  their  willingness  to 
behave in an ethical way; 
 Ethical design: ethical principles and values outline how an organisation ideally 
wishes to behave, and what it is not willing to do; 
 Organisational design: the process of aligning the structure of an organisation 
with its objectives, with the aim of improving efficiency and effectiveness. Both 
ethical and organisational design can be implemented and published to signal 
intrinsic motivation to be trustworthy. 
We have defined these factors as ‘external’ as a single ecosystem player cannot 
define and implement these rules independently of others. However, it is often the 
case  that individual organisations  often  have  a  high  degree  of  autonomy  and 
responsibility  in  adapting  to  these  rules, and  also  deciding  the  degree  of 
engagement they wish to have with external processes. For example this applies 
to codes of conduct and organisational design. 
In  addition  to  these  rules, an  organisation  can  boost  their  trustworthiness  by 
developing a reputation of  being competent
37
 and having the  required skills  and 
expertise  in-house.  This  type  of  reputation  can  be  sustained through ongoing 
relationships within the ecosystem.   
 
 
35
  https://theodi.org/article/designing-trustworthy-data-institutions-report/  
36
  https://theodi.org/article/designing-trustworthy-data-institutions-report/  
37
  Which will be highly dependent on the skills and expertise accumulated within an organisation over time. 

 
frontier economics  27 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Outputs: increased trust and trustworthiness 
A combination of the above activities in a specific data ecosystem can in turn foster 
an environment characterised by greater trust and trustworthiness.  
At the outputs stage, the logic model then maps the trust relationship between the 
actors  of a  data  ecosystem. This  relationship  will  vary for  each  data  ecosystem, 
based on the components of trust and trustworthiness we set out in Section 2.1.1.  
In some ecosystems, an intermediary organisation stewards data on behalf of data 
contributors  and  shares it  with  data  users.  In  these  instances,  activities  result  in 
organisations being more trustworthy and committing to behave in an ethical way 
and deliver on their promises.  
As a result of organisations being more trustworthy: 
 data  contributors  and  subjects  are  more  confident  that  their  data  is  being 
shared securely, and their privacy is being respected. They will therefore place 
greater trust in an organisation and will be more willing to share data with them.  
 data users are more confident that the data they will use is accurate and useful. 
They will therefore also place greater trust in the organisation and will be more 
willing to use data provided by them. 
In   other   ecosystems,   it   might   be   the   case   that   data   flows   directly   from 
contributors/subjects to data users, without the presence of an intermediary. Even 
in  these  instances, activities  aimed  at  ensuring  greater  trustworthiness  will 
strengthen  the  trust  linkage  between  them. This  virtuous  cycle  strengthens trust 
overall in the community affected and enabled by the data ecosystem. 
Outcomes: more data shared, collected and used 
A virtuous cycle of increased trustworthiness and trust enables data to flow more 
freely  within  the  ecosystem  (an  end  state  consistent  with a ‘farmland for data’ 
scenario). In particular: 
 As  a  result  of  data  institutions  being  more  trustworthy  and  data  contributors 
being more trusting, more data is collected and shared. As a result of greater 
volumes of data available, other things equal, more data is used.  
 As  a  result  of  data  institutions  being  more  trustworthy  and  data  users  being 
more trusting, for a given volume of data shared, a greater portion of that data 
may now be used and its potential unlocked. 
Incidents related to the mishandling of data are reduced as a result of increased 
trustworthiness  and  competence  of  data  institutions,  causing  fewer  breaches  in 
trust in the data ecosystem. 

 
frontier economics  28 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Impacts: economic and social value added 
The last section in the logic model maps the economic and social value generated 
by greater data sharing, collection and use. Greater data sharing and use in turn 
generate economic and social impacts through three main theories of change:
38
 
 Information  theory  of  change: more,  higher  quality  information  is  used  by 
organisations. 
 Competition   theory   of   change: lower   barriers   to  market   entry   increase 
competition  between  organisations  resulting  in  more,  higher-quality  products 
and services and lower prices for consumers.  
 Ecosystem theory of change: an ecosystem of innovative firms that are familiar 
with ethical data practices is created. Policymakers can harness the power of 
trustworthy data to make evidence-based decisions. 
Each theory of change results in a range of social and economic impacts: 
 First,  as  a  result  of  greater  information  and  competition  unlocked  by  data 
sharing  and  use,  individuals  change  attitudes  towards  sharing  data  and are 
more trusting of other actors in the ecosystem, reinforcing a positive trust-data 
sharing feedback loop; 
 As a result of more competition between organisations, individuals benefit from 
higher-quality  products  and  lower  prices  in  commercial  settings,  and  higher-
quality  services  in  commercial  and  civic  settings  (e.g.  better  public  services 
from government); 
 As a result of greater competitive pressure, firms are more efficient in producing 
goods and services and have greater incentive to innovate; 
 A new and improved ecosystem of innovative firms generates improved data 
skills and infrastructure, higher labour productivity and agglomeration benefits, 
all leading to greater gross value added; 
 Greater use and collection of data, in part facilitated by greater trust can also 
generate  benefits  associated  with  evidence-based  policymaking. As  a result, 
society at large benefits from a more trustworthy data ecosystem both in the 
public and private sphere. For example, increased trust in how personal data 
is handled in the UK could lead to more people willing to download the NHS 
COVID-19 app and share data about their movement. As a result, more data 
sharing and use can ultimately lead to a better understanding of how the virus 
spreads amongst the population.  
As  is further  detailed  in  the  following  sections, we have  not quantified each 
separate logical block in this model due to limitations in the underlying evidence. 
However, the logic model sets the foundations of our economic framework, helping 
us to contextualise and unpack the research question into its components. 
 
 
38
  These theories of change build on Frontier Economics research commissioned by the ODI in 2019 on the 
economic impact of open standards for data. 

 
frontier economics  29 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
2.2.2 Framework limitations 
Our framework attempts to set out the key theoretical linkages between trust, data 
sharing and economic impacts. When investigating the economic impact of trust in 
data ecosystems,  there  is  value  in  spelling  out  the  channels  through  which  we 
expect trust to bring positive economic and social impact. 
The conceptual elements of the framework are generic in nature and not intended 
to capture  the  nuanced  relationship  between  trust  and data  sharing  within all 
possible  data ecosystems. Context  is  going  to  impact  the  relationship  between 
trust and data sharing differently in each specific data ecosystem. 
It is also important to note how, by construction, the logic model embedded in our 
framework  highlights  how  trust  can  bring  positive  economic  and  social  impact, 
describing a virtuous cycle in which greater trust leads to more data sharing and 
associated economic benefits, which in turn are going to further strengthen trust in 
the  ecosystem.  This  is  a  useful  tool  to  aid  conceptual  understanding  of  such  a 
complex  topic,  but  does  not  necessarily  capture  what  might  happen  if  a  vicious 
cycle  were  to  materialise  in  an  ecosystem,  one  where  a  lack  of  trust  negatively 
impacts data sharing and generates potential economic losses. Nonetheless, the 
framework  still  serves  as  a  useful  starting  point  to  step  through  the  research 
question.  

 
frontier economics  30 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
3 FRAMEWORK CALIBRATION AND 
QUANTITATIVE EVIDENCE 
In this section we build on our theoretical framework which describes conceptually 
how  trust  can  impact  data  sharing  and  wider  economic  impacts.  We  calibrated 
aspects  of this  framework using  the  evidence that  we  identified  as  part  of  our 
literature  review.  This  allowed us  to  quantify  relationships  of  interest  as  well  as 
highlight gaps in the existing evidence base.  
Below we articulate the key insights arising from the estimates of the impact of trust 
on data sharing, collection and use. 
3.1 Evidence used 
As outlined in Section 1.2.2, we identified a total of 87 academic and policy papers 
examining the impact of trust on data sharing, collection and use using three main 
techniques:   empirical   survey   evidence,   natural   experiments   and  theoretical 
models. 
As we outlined in the Approach section, we classified all identified relevant papers 
into high (21 papers), medium (16 papers) and low (50 papers) relevance. Highly 
relevant papers directly address our question of interest and include a quantitative 
assessment of the impact of trust on data sharing, collection and use.  
Out of the highly relevant studies identified, 8 included a direct quantification of the 
impact of trust on data sharing, therefore forming the basis for our estimation.
39
 
The medium- and  low-relevance  studies identified typically do  not  include  a 
quantified impact estimate of trust. However, in many cases they still provide useful 
evidence to contextualise and provide greater nuance to our quantified aggregate 
impacts. 
In  addition  we  have  analysed  a  wide  set  of  “natural  experiments”  looking  at 
dynamic changes to trust levels in real-life settings and their impact on data sharing 
behaviour. A detailed review of the evidence is provided in the Annex.  
3.2 Framework calibration 
3.2.1 Triangulation of evidence 
The core of our work focused on quantifying the impact of trust on data sharing, 
collection and use. Additionally, we linked our core estimates to existing evidence 
on the economic impact of data sharing and use. This second linkage has received 
extensive attention in previous work. 
 
 
39
  The remaining quantified studies typically include a quantification on the levels of trust and data sharing 
measured via surveys. The reason for excluding them from the calibration exercise is that in those cases it 
is not possible to directly translate these into a reliable estimate of the impact of trust on data sharing.   

 
frontier economics  31 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
In  the  context  of  this  research,  calibrating our  economic  framework  has  meant 
parameterising our framework to understand what proportional change in data use 
could be achieved by particular changes in trust within the ecosystem. 
Therefore, our calibration has relied on existing estimates already available in the 
literature. Our  ability  to  test  the  existence  of  these  conceptual  relationships 
depends on the base of existing evidence. As a result, it is not always possible to 
split  out  effects  according  to  each relationship articulated  in  the  economic 
framework,  for  example,  the  specific  activity  in  question  (e.g.  data  collection  vs. 
data use) or different actors (e.g. data institution vs. data subject). 
As described in the Approach section, based on academic evidence collected and 
on the review of natural experiments, we have been able to assess the aggregate 
impact of trust on data sharing, collection and use in two steps: 
 We compared estimates from the academic evidence reviewed to measure the 
aggregate relationship between trust and data sharing, collection and use. The 
evidence we reviewed applies regression estimation techniques to assess the 
impact of trust, allowing us to draw statistically meaningful conclusions on the 
relationship between trust and data sharing.
40
 However, as described above, 
the direction of causality may not always be clear in these studies.
41
   
 To test the robustness of the main conclusions we draw from the calibration of 
academic estimates. We then assess whether changes in trust have an impact 
on data-sharing behaviour by looking into a set of major shocks to trust in real-
life settings (i.e. ‘natural experiments’). 
3.2.2 Standardisation of the impact of trust on data sharing 
Seven studies  amongst  those we  have  reviewed provide  a  direct  quantified 
estimate of the impact of trust on data sharing, and those studies formed the core 
of our evidence base. 
To  assess  the  aggregate  impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing,  we transformed  the 
available  estimates to  ensure  they were  directly  comparable. Specifically, trust 
constructs and data-sharing constructs in each study needed to be converted to a 
common  format.
42
 That  conversion  allowed  us  to  measure  the  estimates  of  the 
impact of trust on data sharing on a like-for-like basis and draw out more general 
conclusions on the aggregate impact of trust on data sharing. 
Measurement of trust and data sharing 
In many studies, trust is assessed via survey responses to questions which include 
set response options. In other cases, trust is measured through a proxy such as 
 
 
40
  Typically, regression results provide an estimate for the impact of an independent variable (in this case 
trust) on a dependent variable (in this case data sharing, collection and use). However, a linear probability 
model may be unable to completely isolate the pure exogenous impact of trust on data sharing, collection 
and use, even when attempting to account for other trust determinants. More details on how to interpret 
regression results are presented in the Annex. 
41
  This is because most estimates are obtained by applying regressions techniques to survey data, via linear 
probability models with or without controls and as such reverse causality could be an issue. 
42
  For one out of the 8 quantified studies it was not possible to arrive at a standardised impact estimate, 
therefore that was excluded from the calculation of aggregate impact. 

 
frontier economics  32 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
shared  norms  or  common  objectives.  In the  quantitative  studies  reviewed, 
willingness to share data or data sharing behaviour is usually measured: 
 On a 5-point Likert scale, from 1 (‘strongly disagree’ with the statement: would 
you be willing to share data with an organisation in a specific ecosystem) to 5 
(‘strongly agree’ with that statement) 
 As  a  binary  variable  (‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer to the question “have you shared 
data/do   you   want   to   share   data   with a   given intermediary or   another 
organisation in a specific data ecosystem”). 
As explained above, most of the studies measure self-reported willingness to share 
data, rather  than actual data-sharing  behaviour over  time.
43
 Also, studies on the 
relationship  between  trust  and  data  sharing  tends  to  focus  more  on  the  data-
sharing behaviour of individuals than of organisations.
44
 Studies on individual data 
sharing also tend to be more quantitative in nature. Because of this, the majority 
of the quantified studies considered for the framework calibration refer to individual 
data sharing. 
Estimating the aggregate impact of trust on data sharing 
In Figure 9 below  we list all  the  quantified  studies  which  formed  part  of  our 
calibration exercise. In all of the studies reviewed, the sample is large enough to 
draw statistically meaningful conclusions. In the subset of 7 comparable quantified 
studies, 5 refer to individual data-sharing behaviour, while 2 focus on organisations 
sharing data. 
 
 
43
  Most of the studies identified investigated the impact of trust on data sharing. Relatively less evidence is 
publicly available on the impact of trust on data collection or use. 
44
  Of the 87 studies identified in total, 35 focus on individuals sharing data and 23 focus on organisations 
sharing data. 

 
frontier economics  33 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 9 Quantified studies 
Author Year Title 
Actor sharing 
data 
Nasser 2020 
Impacts of Trust in Government and Privacy Risk 
Concern on Willingness to Provide Personal 
Information in Saudi Arabia 
Individual 
Wiseman 2019 
Farmers and their data: An examination of 
farmers’ reluctance to share their data through the 
lens of the laws impacting smart farming 
Organisation 
Bauer 2019 
Trust and cooperative behaviour: Evidence from 
the realm of data-sharing 
Individual 
Bijlsma 2020 
Consumer propensity to adopt PSD2 services: 
trust for sale? 
Individual 
Gupta 2015 
Measuring the impact of security, trust and privacy 
in information sharing: A study on social 
networking sites 
Individual 
Liao 2011 
Achieving mass customization through trust-
driven information sharing: a supplier's 
perspective 
Organisation 
Beldad 2019 
Here’s my location, for your information: The 
impact of trust, benefits, and social influence on 
location sharing application use among 
Indonesian university students 
Individual 
Source:  Frontier Economics review of evidence 
Note: While originally considered for the quantification, Rissman (2019) was excluded from the aggregate 
impact calibration for lack of comparability of coefficient estimates with the other studies. 
All  estimates  in  the  quantified  studies, except  for  Liao (2011)  are  obtained  from 
regression  coefficients which  we  have  subsequently  standardised.  Generally, 
these regression coefficients can be classified in two categories based on how the 
independent  variable  (trust),  and the  dependent  variable  (data  sharing) are 
measured in the regression: 
 categorical variable (trust) on categorical variable (data sharing); 
 categorical variable (trust) on binary variable (data sharing). 
Figure 10 below provides more detail on the type of evidence used in the calibration 
as well as an illustrative example on how to interpret coefficient estimates. The 0.6 
parameter  value  used  here  is  purely  illustrative  and  does  not  refer  to  a  specific 
finding in the literature.   

 
frontier economics  34 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 10 Estimates standardisation 
Category Studies 
Trust  
measurement 
Data sharing  
measurement 
Interpreting an 
example coefficient 
of 0.6 
Categorical 
on 
categorical 
Nasser 
(2020), 
Wiseman 
(2019), 
Gupta 
(2015),  
Liao  
(2011), 
Beldad 
(2015) 
5 point Likert 
scale 
5 point Likert 
scale 
a 1 point increase in 
trust (i.e. a 20% 
increase in the five 
point trust scale) 
leads to a 0.6 point 
increase in data 
sharing also 
measured on a 5 
point scale (i.e. a 
12% increase in the 
data sharing scale). 
Categorical 
on binary 
Bauer 
(2019), 
Bijlsma 
(2020) 
5 point Likert 
scale 
Binary variable 
(would you 
share data: 
yes / no) 
a 1 out of 5 point 
increase in trust (i.e. 
a 20% increase in the 
five point trust scale) 
leads to a 60% 
increase in data 
sharing 
Source:  Frontier Economics 
Note: the example coefficient indicates the impact of trust (independent variable) on data sharing 
(dependent variable) estimated using a linear probability model of the type y = a + bx + e. Note that b 
= 0.6 is an illustrative example only and does not refer to any specific estimate used for the 
calibration. 
To make estimates comparable, we standardise each coefficient to align with the 
following relationship: a 1 point increase on a 5 point trust scale leads to a X point 
increase on  a  5  point  data  sharing  scale.
45
 In  this  case, X is our  coefficient  of 
interest. The  full  details  of  the  standardisation  calculations  undertaken  for  each 
study, and a list of other quantified evidence which was not directly included in the 
standardisation, can be found in Annex A. 
  
 
 
45
  Where Likert scales range from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) with a statement of the type: do 
you trust organisation x, would you share data with organisation x? 

 
frontier economics  35 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
3.3 Aggregate impact of trust on data sharing 
Point estimate of the linkage between trust and data sharing 
We have calculated aggregate estimates of the impact on trust by computing an 
average of the quantified estimates available. As we have illustrated in the figure 
below, there is considerable variation in terms of trust’s impact on data sharing 
across different studies.  
Figure 11 Impact of a 1 point increase in trust on data sharing 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
The  quantitative  studies we  have reviewed  suggest  that,  on  average, a  1  point 
increase on a 5 point trust scale leads to a 0.27 point increase on a 5 point 
data sharing scale. 
Figure 12 Average impact of trust on data sharing 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
The 0.27 point increase in the data sharing scale as a result of a 1 point increase 
in the trust scale does not refer to a specific level in either of the Likert scales. It 
indicates the effect of an increase in trust regardless of the baseline levels of trust 
and data sharing.  
0.59
0.33
0.25
0.24
0.21
0.14
0.14
0.000.100.200.300.400.500.600.70
Nasser (2020)
Wiseman (2019)
Gupta (2015)
Liao (2011)
Bauer (2019)
Bijlsma (2020)
Beldad (2015)
Point increase in data sharing following a 1 point increase in trust
Average: 0.27 

 
frontier economics  36 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
This simple extrapolation is illustrative as we do not have a strong reason to believe 
that the relationship between trust and data sharing will always be linear in nature. 
In fact,  as  we  discuss  below,  the  role of  trust  in determining  data  sharing  within 
ecosystems is likely to exhibit non-linearities. It is nonetheless helpful to consider 
the  possible  impacts  on data  sharing  associated with  trust  increases  of different 
magnitudes.  
Whilst most of the studies used for this average estimation focused on individual 
data  sharing,
46
 our  results  reveal  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  there  is  any 
difference in the impact of organisational versus individual trust on data sharing. 
As  shown  in Figure 13 below,  the  difference in  impact  based  on  the  reviewed 
evidence is less than 0.02 points. 
Figure 13 Impact of trust on individual versus organisational data sharing 
 
Source: Frontier Economics based on review of evidence 
As this result is based on the 7 quantified studies available in the literature, it is not 
possible  to  be  definitive  on  the  absence  of  any  differences  in  individual  and 
organisational data sharing. Further research to quantify this relationship is needed 
to test the robustness of this result. 
Illustration of the overall relationship between trust and data sharing 
Based on the average estimate it is possible to extrapolate the effect of increases 
in trust of different magnitudes. In Figure 14 below we can see that larger jumps in 
trust  correspond  to  bigger  impacts  on  data  sharing.  For  example, a 3  point 
increase on a 5 point trust scale leads to a 0.81 point increase on a 5 point data-
sharing scale. The equivalent impact for a 4 point increase on a 5 point trust scale 
is a 1.08 increase on a 5 point data-sharing scale.  
 
 
46
  5 of the studies in the calibration focused on individuals sharing data, while 2 focused on organisations 
sharing data. 

 
frontier economics  37 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 14 Illustrative impacts for different increases in trust 
 
Interpretation of the results 
As we noted in Section 1, currently a low proportion of the general population trusts 
a  number  of  organisational  types  with  ethical  data  practices/collecting  personal 
data.
47
 This  suggests  that  there  is  scope  to  achieve  significant  improvements  in 
trust in several settings. As a result data sharing could be significantly boosted by 
over 20% (in excess of one point on a five point willingness to share data scale) in 
some cases if average trust is increased from low levels to high levels. 
In addition, the evidence we rely on to quantify this linkage of interest measures 
willingness to share data on standardised scales rather than actual data sharing. 
It may be that once a certain average level of willingness to share data is reached, 
actual data sharing rises by a greater amount. In other words, a one-point or 20% 
increase in willingness to share data (measured on a five-point scale) could lead 
to a far larger than 20% increase in actual data sharing in certain circumstances. 
This could occur if, for example, actors within a specific data ecosystem move from 
an average position of being neutral with regards to data sharing to being willing 
to  share  data.  Crossing these key  threshold  points  may  only  require  a relatively 
small change in attitudes but still have a large impact on data sharing, collection 
and use. 
These aggregate results show that even large increases in trust will correspond to 
moderate impacts on willingness to share data overall. This serves to emphasise 
that  trust  alone  is  unlikely  to  be  sufficient  to  encourage  greater  sharing. Other 
factors such as the existence of suitable data-sharing mechanisms and the ability 
of ecosystem participants to locate and coordinate with each other will also play a 
key role. Exploring the determinants of data sharing in this context and how they 
can complement increases in trust will be an important area for future research. 
 
 
47
  https://theodi.org/article/nearly-9-in-10-people-think-its-important-that-organisations-use-personal-data-
ethically/  

 
frontier economics  38 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
3.3.1 Potential drivers of observed variation 
The  impact  estimates  we  have  calculated  and  reported  above are obtained  by 
computing an average of the quantified estimates included in the calibration. The 
context of a specific trust relationship within a specific ecosystem is important in 
determining  the  specific  impact  of  trust  within  a  given  context. When  comparing 
the impact estimates included in the calibration, we have investigated whether any 
of  the  identified  contextual  factors  that  make  trust  more  or  less  important  to  the 
functioning  of  data  ecosystems or  differences  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the 
researchers might be driving some of the observed variation in estimates. 
Given  that  we  are  examining  a  relatively  small  number  of  studies, we  cannot 
definitely  determine  what contextual  factors  might  be driving  all  of the  observed 
variation  in  quantitative  estimates. Nonetheless,  we  can  highlight  some  stylised 
facts which hold across the evidence base which can give some insights into the 
causes of heterogeneity in estimates. 
Methodological differences   
As we   would expect,   the   methodological   approach adopted   by   different 
researchers  can affect  the estimated magnitude  of  the impact  of  trust  on  data 
sharing. In particular, there is some tentative evidence that less internally robust 
studies (based on our assigned internal-validity scores) tend to overestimate the 
impact of trust on data sharing.  
Lower  internal-validity  scores  are  due  to  small  samples  sizes  or  less  rigorous 
methods  and  imply  that  the  observed  results  are  more  likely  to  have  been 
influenced by chance/randomness. 
 For  example, the  largest  impact  estimate in the sample (Nasser  2020) might 
differ from other estimates due to the fact that the estimation was conducted 
on a small sample, using a simple linear regression model without attempting 
to control for confounding factors. 
 On the other hand, estimates derived from the Bijlsma (2020) study are drawn 
from a more robust experimental survey design (i.e. participants are randomly 
allocated  to different  vignette  scenarios to  capture  perceptions  of  trust  in  a 
specific  scenario, and  estimation  is  done  through a  range  of  regression 
techniques on a fairly large sample of respondents).  
We  can  therefore   infer   that   more  internally   valid  studies  approximate   the 
relationship between trust and data sharing more closely. 
Baseline levels of trust 
Once methodological differences are taken into account, there are a few potential 
factors which might explain where the impact of trust is more or less important. We 
have identified some tentative evidence that the impact of trust tends to be larger 
where initial levels of trust are low than when there is already a significant amount 
of trust between actors in the ecosystem. We illustrate this in Figure 15 below. In 
particular:  

 
frontier economics  39 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 the Wiseman  (2019)  study  shows  a relatively  higher  (0.33) point increase  in 
data sharing as a result of a 1 unit increase in trust, starting from a relatively 
lower level of baseline trust (2.4/5). 
 On  the  contrary,  Beldad (2015)  displays  a  relatively  lower  (0.14)  increase  in 
data  sharing  as  result  of  a  1  unit  increase  in  trust,  starting  from  a  relatively 
higher baseline level of trust (3.54). 
This is in line with our assumption that the impact of trust on data sharing is not 
necessarily linear in nature and the impact of an increase in trust tends to be higher 
for lower starting levels of trust. 
It  is  not  possible  to  draw  definitive  conclusions  based  only  on the  relatively  few 
studies which specify both a baseline level of trust and the relationship between 
trust and data sharing.  
Figure 15 The  impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing  for  different  levels  of 
baseline trust 
  
Source: Frontier Economics 
Note: Only three studies out of the quantified evidence in the calibration included an indication of the 
baseline levels of trust for the ecosystem under analysis. 
The different levels of baseline trust observed in these studies could in part reflect 
previous  interventions  deployed  in  different  circumstances.  They  could  also  be 
driven by contextual factors which we discuss in greater detail below.  
Our qualitative engagement confirmed that baseline levels of trust matter and that 
interventions to boost trust and encourage further data sharing need to be tailored 
to the specific ecosystem. For example, we were told by organisations active in the 
use of healthcare data for research that acting quickly is crucial when baseline trust 
levels are low. In these circumstances providing informative answers to questions 
raised  by  other  actors  or  rectifying  issues  quickly  becomes  essential.  Allowing 
uncertainty to persist can quickly lead to a significant loss of willingness to share 
data. Where trust is high, we  were told that there may be less urgency as other 
stakeholders will be more likely to give data institutions the benefit of the doubt and 
need a relatively compelling reason to stop sharing data. 

 
frontier economics  40 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Other stakeholders noted that in newer ecosystems where baseline levels of trust 
are  relatively  low  the  importance  of  formal  regulations  and rules  are  enhanced. 
Stakeholders from both the health and financial services ecosystems emphasised 
that  trust  is  also  heavily  dependent  on  informal  linkages  and  establishing  of 
relationships  between  institutions  and  individuals  over  time.  This more  organic 
development  of  trust  is  closely  linked  to  commonalities  in  terms  of  culture  and 
experience  of  repeated  interactions.  These  drivers  can  complement  the  more 
formal rules and regulations. However, this type of informal trust development is 
usually  less  feasible  initially  in  newer  ecosystems  where  baseline  levels  of  trust 
are lower (or between newer players in an established ecosystem). 
Similarly, some interviewees did note that this type of informal trust development 
can in some circumstances make it difficult for a new entrant to successfully join 
an  established  ecosystem  and  access/share  data  even  if  they  adhere  to  all  the 
formal rules. This type of informal development of trust over time can also mean 
that  attributing  an  increase  in  trust  to  a specific  intervention  or  event  can  be 
challenging.  
Stakeholders also made the point that ecosystems where trust has yet to develop 
are  very  different  to  cases  where  trust  used  to  exist  but  has  subsequently  been 
lost.  In  these  scenarios, stakeholders  agreed  that  rebuilding  trust  is  much  more 
difficult  and  can  require  more  radical  interventions  such as  the  establishment  of 
new  institutions  and fundamental  alterations  to  the  way  in  which  data  is shared. 
We discuss examples of breaches of trust in greater detail below.   
Other stakeholders noted that in order to encourage greater data sharing in new 
ecosystems development of trust has to be accompanied by a clear articulation of 
the benefits of sharing data to all parties. This will help to ensure that stakeholders 
will overcome the initial barriers associated with engaging with new counterparties. 
If  this  engagement  involves  organisations  communicating  with  the  wider  public, 
stakeholders made the point that wherever possible this communication should be 
personalised. For example, this could include letting a patient know exactly how 
their data will be used and how it will contribute to high quality care for others.    
Ecosystem context 
The studies we have used refer to a range of different sectors, geographies and 
data  ecosystems. This  in  itself  will  influence  the  survey  responses  obtained  and 
the  resulting  estimates  of the impact of  trust on  data  sharing. For  example,  in 
Figure 16 below we illustrate the sector diversity of the underlying estimates. 
Most  sectors  only  contain  one  study  which  provides  applicable  quantitative 
evidence.   Therefore,   we   cannot   draw   any   robust   overarching   conclusions 
regarding the impact of trust in different individual data ecosystems. However, we 
can be confident that the impact estimates linked to each of these studies will in 
part depend on the context and ecosystem in which they were carried out. As a 
result some of the observed variation will be linked to this context. 

 
frontier economics  41 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 16 Sectoral contexts of underlying evidence 
 
Source: Frontier Economics based on evidence review 
Our  qualitative  engagement  confirmed  that contextual  factors  are  crucial  to 
understanding  the  role  of  trust  in  influencing  data  sharing.  For  example,  all 
stakeholders agreed that sharing more sensitive forms of data such as personal 
financial  information  or  health  records would  require  higher  levels  of  trust  and 
perceived security in advance. The prevalence of these different types of data will 
clearly vary depending on the ecosystem or sector in question. 
In  addition, the  studies  we  have  used  to  parameterise  our  framework cover 
numerous geographic contexts within North America, Europe, Asia and Oceania 
(see Figure 17 below). 
Figure 17 Geographic context of underlying evidence 
 
Source: Frontier Economics review of evidence 
Note: Geographic location was unavailable for Gupta (2015) 
As  we  emphasised  when  describing  the  conceptual  impact  of  trust  via  our  logic 
model, norms and unwritten attitudes will play a role in determining baseline levels 
Social Media
Bauer (2019)
Gupta (2015)
Banking  & finance
Bijlsma (2020)
Agriculture  & land use
W iseman (2019)
Government & public 
sector
Nasser (2020)
Personal  location  data
Beldad (2015)
Commercial  supply 
chain data sharing
Liao (2011)
Liao (2011)
Liao (2011)
Wiseman (2019)
Beldad  (2015)
Nasser (2020)
Bijlsma  (2020)
Bauer (2019)

 
frontier economics  42 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
of   trust   and   how   questions   are   intercepted.   These   norms   will   likely   vary 
substantially both between individuals and also across different regions.  
As  such, a  certain  proportion  of  the  underlying  variation  in  estimates  we  have 
presented will likely be due to the geographic contents in which the studies were 
carried  out.  However,  as mentioned above, we  cannot robustly  determine  how 
large this proportion will be. 
Importantly, interviewees emphasised that while different ecosystems are unique, 
efforts should be made to exhibit and build trust horizontally rather than purely on 
a  sector-by-sector  basis.  This  is  because  certain  data  ecosystems  cannot  be 
treated  in  isolation,  particularly  from the  point  of  view  of  end  users: Actors  will 
simultaneously share data with different organisations in different sectors, and this 
data will be interconnected across ecosystems. 
Achieving this level of consistency, while still accounting for differences in context, 
may involve setting out general principles and/or categories of intervention to build 
trust. These can then be adapted and tailored for flexible implementation. 
3.4 Impact of changes in trust in data ecosystems  
3.4.1 Assessing the impact of changes in trust in data 
ecosystems  
Survey results can only measure the relationship between trust and data sharing 
in static terms and are not able to capture actual data-sharing behaviour over time. 
To  address  this, we  have  augmented  the  survey  evidence  with a  wide  set  of 
“natural experiments” looking at shocks to trust levels in real-life settings and their 
impact on data-sharing behaviour. 
This  analysis  complements  our assessment  of  the  aggregate  impact  of  trust  on 
data sharing, to test whether changes in trust have a causal impact on data-sharing 
behaviour in real-life settings. 
Defining the counterfactual 
To evaluate the impact of trust shocks on data-sharing behaviour in these real-life 
examples, we have contextualised it via a theoretical framework. This framework 
defines two alternative counterfactual scenarios.  
Specifically, we have considered the amount of data sharing, collection and use 
which   is   consistent with actual   levels   of   trust and   compared   this to two 
counterfactual scenarios (see Figure 18 below for further detail): 
 No trust counterfactual: the hypothetical level of data sharing and use that might 
be expected in there was no trust in a given context; 
 Perfect trust counterfactual: the hypothetical level of data sharing and use that 
might be expected if there was perfect trust in a given context. 

 
frontier economics  43 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 18 Movements in trust 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
Ideally,  to  examine  the  impact  of  trust  at  the  global  level,  we  would  measure 
movements  from  actual  levels  of  trust  to  a  scenario  where  trust  is  completely 
eroded  (Question  1),  and  vice  versa  to  one  where  there  was  no  mistrust  at  all 
(Question 2). However, the real-life examples we are looking to examine are only 
able to partially proxy these theoretical trust movements: 
 Question 1: impact of moving from current levels of trust to somewhat “less” 
trust (but  not  possible  to  determine  a  real-life  scenario  where  trust  is  fully 
eroded); 
 Question 2: impact of moving from current levels of trust to somewhat “more” 
trust – not  necessarily  reflecting  a  perfect  trust  counterfactual  (e.g.  the 
introduction  of  GDPR increases trust  by  making  data-sharing  practices more 
secure, but there are other aspects of trust that GDPR doesn’t address, so 
post-GDPR we are still not in a perfect trust scenario). 
Calibrating the dynamic impact of changes in trust in data ecosystems 
using natural experiments 
To consider the impact of exogenous shocks in trust on data sharing and thereby 
validate the robustness of the correlational estimates, we evaluate a set of natural 
experiments.  As  we  described  above, the  main advantage  of  these  natural 
experiments  in  relation  to survey  evidence  is that they  allow  us  to  gauge  data-
sharing behaviour over time as a result of a shock in trust at a given point in time. 
While natural experiments may provide an indication of the impact of an exogenous 
shock in trust, we cannot be certain that any impacts are entirely due to changes 
in trust. It may be, for example, that a data breech leads to a loss of trust and a 
greater  understanding  of  the  actual  costs  and  benefits  of  sharing  data.  Both  of 
these factors could then impact subsequent data sharing.  

 
frontier economics  44 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
3.4.2 Moving from actual trust to no trust 
How trust breaks down and real-life examples 
There are several routes by which trust can be eroded. We have listed out possible 
channels in Figure 19 below which draws on O’Hara (2018).
48
 
Figure 19 How trust breaks down 
Channel Example 
Misrepresentation 
“An example of misrepresentation of a data 
institution’s ability might be if it provides data 
contributors with assurances about data protection, 
but does not have good security measures in place, 
which comes to light when it suffers a data breach.” 
Misunderstanding 
“A misunderstanding of the audience could arise 
when a data institution claims to have a social 
benefit purpose, such as improving healthcare, and 
furthers that purpose by sharing data with private 
sector organisations, such as pharmaceutical 
companies. The data institution may see their 
purpose at a system level, and the development of 
new drugs as ultimately contributing to better 
healthcare. But data contributors may have a 
narrower view, and see companies making profit 
through using data about them as unacceptable.” 
Inability to determine 
trustworthiness 
“A stakeholder might be unable to determine how 
much to trust a data institution if it cannot get 
access to information about the sources of the data 
it stewards, or the process through which requests 
for access are granted.” 
Failure to communicate changes 
“A failure to communicate a change in 
circumstances might arise if a data institution is 
absorbed into, or spun out of, another organisation 
and this is not communicated clearly; or if new data 
contributors or data users enter into agreements 
with the data institution, particularly if those 
organisations have poor reputations.” 
Source:  O’Hara (2018)  
The real-life examples  of  trust  erosion  we  have considered mostly  relate  to 
breaches  of  trust  due  to misrepresentation.  In  the  past  this  has  occurred 
because: 
 The  data  institution  was  found  sharing  data  with  third  parties  without  the 
consent of the data subject; 
 The  data  institution  suffered  a  data  breach  as  a  result  of  infrastructure 
failure/not following security protocols. 
Figure 20 below outlines the examples of negative trust shocks we looked into to 
gauge the impact of a decrease in trust on data sharing. This is representative of 
a variety of industries and ecosystems but it is not intended to be exhaustive. 
 
 
 
48
  https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/341800/1/ohara_trust_working_paper_aug_2012.pdf  

 
frontier economics  45 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 20 Breaches in trust through misrepresentation 
Trust breach Year Type of incident 
Cambridge Analytica - Facebook 
data breach 
2018 handing data to third party without 
consent 
 
NHS care.data information 
scheme closed 
2016 
handing data to third party without 
consent 
Pharmacy2U fined by ICO on 
selling customer information to 
marketing companies 
2015 
 
handing data to third party without 
consent 
 
Google DeepMind/Royal Free 
NHS Foundation Trust partnership 
fails to comply with GDPR 
 
internal mishandling of sensitive data 
 
Talktalk data breach 2015 
 
data breach due to infrastructure failure 
Experian data breach 2020 
 
data breach due to infrastructure failure 
Ashley Madison data breach 2015 data breach due to security failure 
TSB online banking failure 
2018 
online banking failure causing massive 
disruption to customers, and to some 
extent, revelation of personal data to 
other customers 
Source:  Frontier & ODI  
Impact of breaches in trust  
To assess the impact of exogenous negative shocks to trust on data sharing, we 
have  compared  statistics  and quantified  commercial  impacts on  each  of  the 
selected incidents.  
This comparison exercise enabled us to test the direction of causality (i.e. whether, 
as we would expect, a negative shock to trust has led to a decrease in data sharing 
over time), and draw out some key stylised facts on how this is likely to vary based 
on the context of the case at hand. 
As expected, in all cases analysed, a breach in trust caused reputational damage 
to the data institution as well as a decrease in the number of individuals willing to 
share  data  with  that  particular  institution. This  is  fully  consistent  with  our 
parameterised trust model. 
In addition, the effects were not homogenous. Rather, in some cases the negative 
shock to trust  had a permanent impact, whereas  in  other  cases the reduction  in 
data sharing was temporary. For example: 
 In  2018  it came  to  light  that millions  of  Facebook users'  personal  data  was 
acquired  without  consent  by  Cambridge  Analytica.  This  information  was 
predominantly  to  be  used  for  political  advertising. After  this incident,  many 
users professed they did not trust Facebook to hold their data and temporarily 

 
frontier economics  46 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
cancelled their accounts.
49
 However, only months later, users had by and large 
resumed their activity on the platform.
50
 
 care.data  was  an  attempt by  the  then  Health  and  Social  Care  Information 
Centre to extract data from GP surgeries into a central database. Patient data 
would be used in anonymised form by health care researchers, including those 
outside the NHS, such as academic institutions or commercial organisations. 
In 2016, concerns about the NHS care.data information scheme were raised in 
relation  to  the sharing  of  sensitive  medical  information  with  commercial 
companies  without  the  explicit  consent  of  patients.  The  scheme  was  closed 
after more than a million users opted out.
51
  
 In 2015 over 150,000 of TalkTalk’s customers had their personal details hacked 
in  a  cyber-attack.  In  the  following  months 101,000  accounts  were  closed, 
95,000 of which were closed as a direct result of the data breach. In 2018  TSB 
customers  were  locked  out  of  their  accounts  following  a  failed  IT  upgrade. 
TSB’s online banking failure resulted in 80,000 customer switching accounts to 
another bank.
52
 
We illustrate the number of NHS patients opting out of care.data and the number 
of customers shifting away from TalkTalk in proportional terms below (Figure 21). 
Figure 21 Examples of trust shocks’ impact  
 
Source: Frontier Economics analysis 
https://www.theregister.com/2016/04/20/one_million_patients_have_opted_out_of_caredata/, 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/talktalk-cyberattack-costs-customers-leave 
 
 
49
  Studies have shown that users’ awareness of data sharing practices increased right after the news became 
public. For example, Shipman et al (2020) found via a survey that participants with the greatest awareness 
of the news story’s details have more polarized attitudes about reuse, especially the reuse of content as 
data. They express a heightened desire for data mobility, greater concern about networked privacy rights, 
increased scepticism of algorithmically targeted advertising and news, and more willingness for social media 
platforms to demand corrections of inaccurate or deceptive content. They found that 1/5th of the 
interviewees deleted their account as a result of the incident. Source: Shipman, F.M. and Marshall, C.C., 
2020, April. Ownership, Privacy, and Control in the Wake of Cambridge Analytica: The Relationship 
between Attitudes and Awareness. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (pp. 1-12). 
50
  This is confirmed by a study looking at the impact of the Cambridge Analytica incident on user behaviour 
over time. Edwards (2019) tracked US Facebook user attitudes towards using the platforms over the course 
of 4 months after the incident became public. Results suggest that the decrease in Facebook’s user base 
was so small that it was likely to make little to no noticeable damage to Facebook's profits or reputation. 
Source: Edwards, J.L., 2019. An Examination of Consumers' Social Media Trust In the Wake of the 
Facebook and Cambridge Analytica Scandal 
51
  https://www.wired.co.uk/article/care-data-nhs-england-closed 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-26259101  
52
  Porcedda, M.G. and Wall, D.S., 2019. Cascade and Chain Effects in Big Data Cybercrime: Lessons from 
the TalkTalk hack, proceedings of WACCO 2019: 1st Workshop on Attackers and Cyber-Crime Operations, 
IEEE EuroS&P 2019, Stockholm, Sweden, June 20, 2019. 

 
frontier economics  47 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
We explored the persistence of shocks to trust in terms of impact on data sharing 
as  part  of  our  qualitative  engagement.  Stakeholders  highlighted  a  number  of 
factors which could lead to a bigger and longer-lasting impact following an initial 
loss of trust. We illustrate these drivers in Figure 22 below. 
These  qualitative  insights  serve  to  highlight  that  a  number  of  contextual  factors 
such as data subjects’ outside options, the nature of the connection between data 
subjects and data stewards as well as the motives of the data steward all have a 
role to play. 
Figure 22 Factors influencing persistence of negative trust shocks 
 
Source: Frontier Economics based on qualitative engagement  
Across all of the examples we have described above it is not possible to entirely 
attribute the loss in users and consumers and knock-on impacts on data sharing 
to a loss in trust. There might be other important contributing factors leading to a 
decrease in data sharing (which are likely to be somewhat related to trust in a data 
steward,  for  example  perception  of  how  competent  the  institution  is  in  handling 
data or a greater understanding of the actual risks involved). 
Our qualitative engagement also revealed that negative shocks to trust which are 
directly related to a single actor can have wider spill-over ramifications for an entire 
sector  or  ecosystem.  In  the  case  of  healthcare  research, we  were  told  that the 
care.data  episode  meant  that  accessing  data  for  legitimate  research  reasons 
became significantly more difficult for a sustained period of time. This occurred for 
two reasons: 
 Patients were more inclined to opt out of other data collection exercises due to 
a loss of trust. This loss in trust was not spread equally across the population. 
Therefore, research datasets were more likely to be biased. As a result there 
was less appetite from policy-makers to act on the conclusions of any work that 
was carried out. 
Loss of trust is more likely to have a 
longer negative impact on data sharing 
Loss of trust is more likely to have a 
temporary impact on data sharing 
▪
Affected actor can 
visibly  rectify issue 
quickly
▪
Scale
of
problem
is
concealed initially  and 
worsens over time
▪
Affected organisation 
made  an error rather 
than  deceiving  for 
commercial  reasons 
▪
Incident  / affected 
organisation  is driven
by
commercial 
motive
s
▪
Fewer individuals  / 
organisations  fell 
connected  to those 
directly  affected 
▪
Incident  is amplified 
by advocacy groups 
or affected population
▪
Affected group 
has 
long  standing 
relationship  with  data 
institution
▪
Affected group  feels 
little  connection  to 
data institution   
▪
Affected 
group 
has 
limited  scope to form 
a new  data sharing 
relationship 
▪
Affected group  has 
easy opt
-
out and  has 
other alternatives  for 
data sharing

 
frontier economics  48 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 Data  stewards  were  increasingly  conscious  of  the  importance  of  maintaining 
patients trust and were less inclined to share the data that they held with other 
researchers. 
Both of these factors meant that less socially beneficial research was carried out 
and effective policymaking and evaluation were hampered. However, interviewees 
also  emphasised  that  in  some  ways  this  shock  to  trust  may  have  led  to  some 
positive  developments  as  it  forced  organisations  to  improve  their  data  collection 
and  sharing  processes.  Specifically,  data  users  told  us  that  the  processes  for 
applying for data are now more streamlined and efficient compared to the situation 
before.  
Stakeholders from the financial services sector made similar observations around 
how  a  major  loss  of  trust  associated  with  a  single  provider  can  have  negative 
impacts  across  the  sector  via  a  wider  loss  of  trust  with  regards  to  an  entire 
ecosystem. 
Other stakeholders emphasised that these type of negative spill-over effects apply 
even  more  broadly  and  a  loss  of  trust  in  one  ecosystem  can  affect  public 
willingness to share data in a completely separate sector. We were told that often 
members  of  the  public  only  hear  about  this  type  of  personal  data  sharing  when 
something  goes  wrong.  As  a  result  they  may  default  to  overestimating  the 
associated risks. 
3.4.3 Moving from actual trust to perfect trust 
How trust is built and real life examples 
Symmetrically  to  the  exercise  above,  to  define  movements  from  actual  levels  of 
trust to perfect trust, we have identified what the possible ways in which the status 
quo (i.e. actual levels of trust) can improve, by highlighting conceptual mechanisms 
through which trust is built.
53
  
The main levers through which trust is built are: 
 external factors:
54
 Laws,   regulations   and   norms,   contracts,   penalties, 
standards, codes of conduct, ethical and organisational design, organisational 
governance. 
 internal factors: Reputation, competence and skills, presence of a pre-existing 
trust relationship. 
Trust-building interventions may include several policy levers, put in place with the 
objective of increasing trust in a data ecosystem.  
Some examples are listed below. This set of examples is representative of a variety 
of industries and contexts, but, as above, it is not intended to be exhaustive. 
 
 
 
53
  As per our logic model in Section 2. 
54
  As outlined in the logic model, organisations often have a degree of agency over these factors, e.g. how the 
organisation reacts to the external regulation, norms and its decisions on organisational governance and 
design. 

 
frontier economics  49 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 
Figure 23 Trust-building interventions 
Intervention Year Purpose 
GDPR 2018 
The GDPR's primary aim is to give control to individuals 
over their personal data and to simplify the regulatory 
environment for international business by unifying the 
regulation within the EU. 
SHARE  
SHARE was created to establish a register of people 
interested in participating in health research. SHARE can 
then check whether individuals might be suitable for health 
research studies. It provides an easy way for people to get 
involved and clearly articulates benefits for research that 
donors might benefit from. Also, importantly the data is held 
securely with clear opt-out mechanisms in place to help 
build trust. 
Open Banking 
 
Open Banking is a secure way to give providers access to 
an individual’s or business’ financial information. Providers 
enrol in Open Banking and are subject to FCA regulation in 
order to provide services. This regulatory oversight is 
designed to build trust and encourage engagement. New 
providers can use a test environment to try out their service 
once they have completed enrolment.   
Establishment 
of data trusts 
 
Data trusts are an approach to looking after and making 
decisions about data. They involve one party authorising 
another to make decisions about data on their behalf, for 
the benefit of a wider group of stakeholders. For example, 
UK Biobank was set up in 2006 to steward genetic data and 
samples from 0.5m people and takes the form of a 
charitable company with trustees. 
Source:  Frontier Economics 
Impact of trust-building interventions 
These  interventions  mostly  focused  on  designing  a  set  of  rules  that  data 
intermediaries  can  conform  to,  to  increase  their  trustworthiness.  Their  effect  on 
data sharing may be non-linear over time:  
 at the  beginning, the  intervention  might  pose  an  additional  burden  on  a data 
institution, therefore deterring data sharing in the ecosystem; but 
 over time, as data intermediaries become more comfortable with the regulation 
and data contributors are able to place greater trust in them, data sharing may 
gradually increase, possibly overtaking pre-intervention levels of data sharing. 
The  highest-quality  quantitative  information  relates  to  the  introduction  of  GDPR 
given its wide reach and high profile. We have summarised some of the existing 
evidence below.  
The   non-linearities   in   terms   of   timing is   confirmed   by   academic   studies 
investigating  the  impact of  the  introduction  of  GDPR  in  2018  on  data  sharing. 
Johnson et al. (2020) found that the week after the enforcement of GDPR, online 
use of web technology vendors fell by 15% in the EU.
55
 Similarly, Goldberg (2019) 
 
 
55
  This can be a proxy to measure data sharing, collection and use in the online space. Websites rely on 
inputs from specialized web technology vendors to provide various services. For instance, "audience 
 

 
frontier economics  50 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
found that recorded page views and revenues fell by about 10% for EU users after 
the GDPR’s enforcement deadline
56
 and Urban (2020) concluded that the number 
of ID-syncing connections decreased by around 40% around the time GDPR went 
into effect.
57
  
However,   interestingly   in   several   cases   these   effects   reversed   over   time. 
Specifically, Johnson (2020) found that the short-run effect eroded over time and 
the  level  of  data  sharing  return  to  levels  observed  before  the  introduction  of  the 
policy (see Figure 24 below). Likewise Urban’s (2020) long-term analysis showed 
a slight rebound in ID-syncing connections. 
Figure 24 Evolution of average web technology vendors per EU website 
 
Source: Chart derived from Johnson (2020) 
Similarly Zhang (2019) found that a company’s voluntary adoption of GDPR led to 
positive  effects  on their customers’  intention  to  disclose  information  to that 
company and increased customer trust. 
Stakeholders from both the financial services and health ecosystems agreed that 
this type of formal intervention can boost trust and facilitate greater data sharing. 
Specifically, we were told that these type of rules can shorten approval times when 
accessing  data  and  that  standardisation  can  help  to  reduce  the  number  of 
individual trust linkages that are needed.  
 
 
measurement" vendors record user site visits and generate statistics on user characteristics, onsite 
activities, and referral channels (examples are Google Analytics, Adobe Audience Manager or smaller 
competitors). The authors argue that websites who do not have the resources to understand and comply 
with GDPR would stop using these services, implying lower levels of data sharing an use overall. Their 
analysis confirms that, the week after the GDPR’s enforcement, website use of web technology vendors for 
EU users fell by 15%. 
56
  They argue this is because privacy regulation increases the firm’s cost of collecting consumer data which 
makes matching with users more costly. As such, the GDPR has the potential to reduce both the amount of 
traffic to a website as well as the amount and quality of web outcome data stored for analytics purposes. 
57
  ID-syncing connections are a measure of the number of users who are being tracked (and their personal 
data collected) by websites to provide personalised advertising.  

 
frontier economics  51 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
As we described above, stakeholders agreed that they needed to be implemented 
alongside more organic development of trust over time and that regulation alone 
was insufficient. Other interviewees noted that these type of interventions will have 
differential  impacts  on  different types of  actor  within  a  specific  ecosystem.  For 
example, we were told that that smaller organisations or individuals may not have 
the time or expertise to fully engage with regulatory systems and rules that are in 
place and may therefore feel that sharing data is more risky than it actually is. This 
serves  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  clearly  communicating  why  certain  rules 
are in place and how they operate.  
In addition, some interviewees in the financial services ecosystem noted that just 
because an intervention of this type leads to a significant impact in data sharing, it 
does not necessarily imply that there has been an increase in trust.  
For example, we were told that in some cases providers are forced to share data 
with   organisations that they   do   not   necessarily   trust   because   the   other 
organisations  have  been  certified  as  a  legitimate  ecosystem  participant  by  the 
central regulator. This clearly reduces the number of trust interactions required (the 
data holder now only needs to trust the regulator’s capability to certify appropriately 
rather than trust all possible new participants). However, we were told that without 
having this choice providers feel as though trust is no longer a relevant concept. 
In  order,  to  mitigate  these  concerns  we  were  told  that  having  ex-ante  rules  and 
regulations needed to be accompanied by clear information on the sanctions that 
will be applied if something goes wrong and the redress mechanisms that will be 
enforced. 
3.5 Economic impact of data sharing 
The  final  stage  of  our  calibration  involved  linking  greater  data  sharing  with 
economic outcomes.  
As we set out in our logic model, there are several channels through which data 
sharing can benefit the economy and society, including: 
 more  higher-quality  information circulates  and more  insights  are  generated 
within ecosystems; 
 greater competition within and across sectors; 
 new business opportunities, increased efficiency and innovation. 
A detailed examination of the economic impact of data sharing, collection and use 
is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  study.  However,  we  have  reviewed  the  available 
academic and policy literature of the social and economic impact of data access 
and  sharing. This  has  allowed  us to  provide  an  indicative,  high-level  estimate  of 
the economic and social impact of trust.
 
 

 
frontier economics  52 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
The OECD  estimates  the economic  value  of  data  sharing  as threefold (2019).
58
 
Evidence  shows  that  greater  levels  of  data  access  and  sharing  can  generate 
positive social and economic benefits: 
 increase the value of data to holders (direct impact);  
 but also help create 10 to 20 times more value for data users (indirect impact);  
 and 20 to 50 times more value for the wider economy (induced impact). 
However, the OECD also notes that quantifying the overall economic and social 
value  of  data  access  and  sharing  is  particularly  challenging.  This  is  because 
available  studies  tend  to  differ  in  terms  of  the  scope  of  the  sectors  (e.g.  public-
sector  versus  private-sector  data  sharing),  the  types  of  data  (e.g.  personal, 
proprietary or public), and the degrees of data openness (and the arrangements 
included  such  as  open  data). Available  studies  also  tend  to  differ  in the 
methodologies employed.
59
 This is fully consistent with the heterogeneity we have 
observed in the present study when reviewing evidence on the impact of trust on 
data sharing, collection and use. 
Overall,  the  evidence  gathered
60
 suggests  that  data  sharing can  help  generate 
social  and  economic  benefits  worth  between  0.1%  and  1.5%  of  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) in the case of public-sector data, and between 1% and 2.5% of GDP 
(in a few studies up to 4% of GDP) when also including private-sector data.
61
 It is 
worth noting that most of the studies which examine the economic value of data 
sharing focus on organisations sharing and re-sharing data (rather than individual 
data sharing). 
Scaling to the GDP of the 20 largest economies in 2019, estimates suggest that 
data sharing could unlock between 700 billion and 1.75 trillion US$ in value. Linking 
these wider results to our framework suggests that a 25% increase in trust could 
therefore generate an additional 47.3 to 118.3 billion US$. 
  
 
 
58
  https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/90ebc73d-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/90ebc73d-
en#:~:text=Overall%2C%20these%20studies%20suggests%20that,also%20including%20private%2Dsector
%20data. 
59
  OECD (2019). Enhancing access to and sharing of data: reconciling risks and benefits for data re-use 
across societies.  
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/90ebc73d-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/90ebc73d-en#back-
endnotea3z5  
60
  Evidence gathering on the economic impact of data access and sharing was mainly guided by the OECD’s 
own review available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/90ebc73d-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/90ebc73d-en#back-endnotea3z5  
61
  Aggregate estimates are computed by drawing from a large pool of available studies on the impact of data 
sharing and access in the public and private sector. The result of the aggregation is likely to be one-off 
effect (or, alternatively an effect that develops over a number of years), rather than an effect that can be 
expected repeatedly year after year. 

 
frontier economics  53 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 25 Scaling the economic impact of trust through data sharing 
Effects calibration Impact Unit 
Estimated economic benefits from 
data access and sharing, for both 
public and private sector data 
1%-3% 
Lower bound-
upper bound, as 
average % of 
GDP 
2019 GDP for the 20 largest 
economies in the world 
70.1  Trillion, US$ 
Scaled economic impact of data 
sharing 
1%-3% of 70.1 trillion = 701 
– 1,753 
Billion, US$ 
Scaled economic impact of a 25% 
increase in trust through data sharing 
6.75% of 701 – 1,753 = 
47.3 – 118.3 
Billion, US$ 
Source:  Frontier Economics calculation based on WEO and OECD data.  
Note:  A 25% increase in trust corresponds to a 1 point increase in the trust Likert Scale.   
 
The  economic  impact  of  a  25%  increase  in  trust  is  achieved  through  a  simple 
scaling exercise which assumes the relationship between trust and data sharing, 
collection  and  use  (and  the  subsequent  relationship  between  data  sharing, 
collection and use and economic impact) are linear. Therefore, these figures are 
able to provide only an indicative estimate of the economic impact of trust, without 
capturing  nuances  on  how  this  is  likely  to  vary  based  on  circumstances  and 
sectors. 
3.6 Evidence gaps and direction of future research 
By linking the results of our in-depth research on the impact of trust on data sharing 
and  existing  evidence  on  the  economic  value  of  data,  this work has  made  an 
important  first  step  towards  assessing  the  economic  impact  of  trust  in  data 
ecosystems. 
While  our  research  has  generated  valuable  preliminary  results  on  the  economic 
impact  of  trust  in  data  ecosystems,  it  has  also  revealed  some  key  gaps  in  the 
existing evidence base. In particular, the study’s original aim was to connect a key 
evidence gap between two key existing strands of literature: 
 the  mechanisms  through  which  trustworthiness  and  trust  can  be  established 
and maintained within data ecosystems; 
 the economic impact of data sharing, collection and access/use. 

 
frontier economics  54 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 26 The research question 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
Our in-depth literature review revealed that: 
 the  volume  of available  quantified  evidence on the  impact  of trust  has so far 
been skewed towards analyses of individuals sharing data about themselves.  
 However, studies on the economic value of data have largely focused on the 
economic value arising from  organisations  re-sharing  data  or  benefiting from 
greater access to data. 
As a result of this, the research highlighted two key gaps in the existing literature, 
as shown in Figure 27 below:  
 Evidence on the link between individuals sharing more data about themselves 
and organisations (and individuals) getting greater access to data, which in turn 
lead to economic impacts; 
 Quantified  evidence  on  the  impact  of  trust  between  organisations  on  the 
amount of data sharing.
62
 
 
 
62
  While our review revealed some evidence on this, the volume of studies is relatively low compared to the 
studies on individual data sharing, so further evidence in this area would be beneficial. 

 
frontier economics  55 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 27 Outstanding gaps in the evidence 
 
Source: Frontier Economics 
These gaps make  it  challenging  to  draw  definitive  conclusions  on  the  economic 
impact of trust in a data ecosystem, but serve as a guide to direct future research 
efforts. Three key areas to explore in future research are: 
 whether increased data sharing by individuals leads to greater data access and 
use by organisations – if so, what are the drivers, if not, what are the barriers; 
 whether increased data sharing has any direct economic impact; and finally 
 additional   quantitative   research   on whether   increased   trust   between 
organisations might increase data sharing. 

 
frontier economics  56 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
4 CONCLUSION 
Overall this work has shown that there is robust quantified evidence that greater 
trust consistently leads to increased data sharing. This confirms existing anecdotal 
evidence and justifies ongoing efforts to design mechanisms to boost trust. 
In particular, our qualitative engagements confirmed how in cases where there is 
scope to achieve significant improvements in trust, the relevant effect size will be 
large. This  could  occur  if, for  example, actors  within  a  specific  data  ecosystem 
move  from  an  average  position  of  being  neutral  with  regards  to  data  sharing  to 
being willing to share data. Crossing these key threshold points may only require 
a relatively small change in attitudes but still have a large impact on data sharing, 
collection and use. 
While evidence gathered as part of this work suggests trust might have a larger 
impact  on  sharing  in  contexts  where  the  baseline  level  of  trust  is  low,  our  work 
suggests that the role of trust alone in fostering data sharing might be moderate 
on average. 
A likely reason for this might be that the elasticity of data sharing to trust, i.e. how 
strong of an impact trust can have on data sharing, will depend not just on baseline 
trust alone, but also on baseline levels of other key determinants of data sharing. 
Other drivers of data sharing and access include building the foundations to enable 
data   flows   such   as   infrastructure   and   standards,   mechanisms   to   mitigate 
commercial,   regulatory   and   legal   risks associated   with   data   sharing,   and 
addressing gaps in knowledge and incentives to share and access data. 
For example, in ecosystems with more established infrastructure and standards for 
data  sharing,  an  increase  in  trust  has  the  potential  to  cause  larger  increases in 
sharing.   
Our work aimed to analyse trust as one of the levers through which data sharing, 
collection and use can be improved. While focusing on trust alone enabled us to 
answer this question in-depth, our conclusions reflect a partial equilibrium exercise 
and are unable to reach conclusions on the interdependencies between trust and 
other determinants of sharing. Exploring wider determinants of data sharing and 
how  they  can  complement  increases  in  trust  will  be  an  important  area for future 
research. 
Both  our  qualitative  engagement  and  our  summary  of  quantitative  research 
emphasises the importance of context when considering the role of trust in data 
ecosystems. The specific trust linkages that exist and their maturity will vary across 
and within certain sectors.  
Our examination of changes in trust over time confirm that trust has a causal impact 
on data sharing. Our stakeholder engagement highlighted a range of factors that 
will play a role in determining the scale of the impact of trust on data sharing and 
the dynamic persistence of effects.  
Further research in this area would be beneficial. As we have noted, a relatively 
small  set  of  papers  examine  the  actual  impact  of  trust  on  data  sharing  using  a 
quantified   approach. Quantitative   evidence   is   particularly   limited   on   trust 
relationships and data-sharing behaviour between organisations. However, most 

 
frontier economics  57 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
of the studies have been carried out recently, which highlights this area as an active 
branch of research.  
Our  research  identified  key  gaps  in  the  existing  evidence,  which  make  it 
challenging to link our core findings on the impact of trust on data sharing to the 
wider literature on the economic impact of data sharing, collection and use. Adding 
to the existing evidence base will allow future work to determine how the economic 
value  of  trust  varies  across  different  activities  (e.g.  data  sharing,  data  collection 
and  data  use)  as  well  as  different  relationships  (e.g.  between individuals  and 
organisations or between organisations specifically). 
  

 
frontier economics  58 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
5 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AGCOM, 2018. Propensity of online users to consent to the use of their personal data by 
third parties when using online services (translated from Italian). 
Allen,  D.W.,  Berg,  A.,  Berg,  C.,  Markey‐Towler,  B.  and  Potts,  J.,  2019.  Some  economic 
consequences of the GDPR. Allen, DWE, Berg A, Berg C, Markey-Towler, B and Potts, J 
(2019)‘Some Economic Consequences of the GDPR’, Economics Bulletin, 39(2), pp.785-
797. 
Anderson, N. and Edwards, K., 2010, December. Building a chain of trust: using policy and 
practice to enhance trustworthy clinical data discovery and sharing. In Proceedings of the 
2010 workshop on governance of technology, information and policies (pp. 15-20). 
Anhalt-Depies,  C.,  Stenglein,  J.L.,  Zuckerberg,  B.,  Townsend,  P.A.  and  Rissman,  A.R., 
2019. Tradeoffs  and  tools  for  data  quality,  privacy,  transparency,  and  trust  in  citizen 
science. Biological Conservation, 238, p.108195. 
Ayaburi, E.W. and Treku, D.N., 2020. Effect of penitence on social media trust and privacy 
concerns:  The  case  of  Facebook. International  Journal  of  Information  Management, 50, 
pp.171-181. 
Ba,  S.  and  Pavlou,  P.A.,  2002.  Evidence  of  the  effect  of  trust  building  technology  in 
electronic markets: Price premiums and buyer behavior. MIS quarterly, pp.243-268. 
Bansal,  G.  and  Gefen,  D., 2010.  The  impact  of  personal  dispositions  on  information 
sensitivity,  privacy  concern  and  trust  in  disclosing  health  information  online. Decision 
support systems, 49(2), pp.138-150. 
Bauer, P.C., Keusch, F. and Kreuter, F., 2019. Trust and cooperative behavior: Evidence 
from the realm of data-sharing. PloS one, 14(8), p.e0220115. 
Beldad, A. and Kusumadewi, M.C., 2015. Here’s my location, for your information: The 
impact of trust, benefits, and social influence on location sharing application  use among 
Indonesian university students. Computers in human behavior, 49, pp.102-110. 
Bijlsma,  M.,  van  der  Cruijsen,  C.  and  Jonker,  N.,  2020.  Consumer  propensity  to  adopt 
PSD2 services: trust for sale?. 
Blanco-Perez,  C.B.,  2019.  Transparency  in  empirical  economic research. IZA  World  of 
Labor. 
Brown, A.J., 2020. “Should I Stay or Should I Leave?”: Exploring (Dis) continued Facebook 
Use     After     the     Cambridge     Analytica     Scandal. Social     Media+     Society, 6(1), 
p.2056305120913884. 
Cao, Q.H., Giyyarpuram, M., Farahbakhsh, R. and Crespi, N., 2020. Policy-based usage 
control for a trustworthy data sharing platform in smart cities. Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 107, pp.998-1010. 
Cao, Q.H., Khan, I., Farahbakhsh, R., Madhusudan, G., Lee, G.M. and Crespi, N., 2016, 
May. A trust model for data sharing in smart cities. In 2016 IEEE International Conference 
on Communications (ICC) (pp. 1-7). IEEE. 
Catoiu, I., Orzan, M., Macovei, O.I. and Iconaru, C., 2014. Modelling users' trust in online 
social networks. Amfiteatru Economic Journal, 16(35), pp.289-302. 
Centre for  Data  Ethics and Innovation,  2020. Addressing  trust in public sector  data use. 
Independent report prepared for the UK Government. 

 
frontier economics  59 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Chavanne,  D.,  2018.  Generalized  trust,  need  for  cognitive  closure,  and  the  perceived 
acceptability of personal data collection. Games, 9(2), p.18. 
Cole, A. and Towse, A., 2018. Legal Barriers to the Better Use of Health Data to Deliver 
Pharmaceutical Innovation. London: Office of Health Economics. 
Cottrill,   C.D.,   2020.   MaaS   surveillance:   Privacy   considerations   in   mobility   as   a 
service. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 131, pp.50-57. 
Critchley, C., Nicol, D. and Otlowski, M., 2015. The impact of commercialisation and genetic 
data  sharing  arrangements  on  public  trust  and  the intention  to  participate  in  biobank 
research. Public Health Genomics, 18(3), pp.160-172. 
Dahmm,  H.,  2020.  Laying  the  Foundation  for  Effective  Partnerships:  An  Examination  of 
Data Sharing Agreements. 
Deloitte, 2013. Market assessment of public sector information. A report prepared for the 
UK Department for Business Innovation and Skills. 
Deloitte, 2017. Assessing the value of TfL’s open data and digital partnerships. 
Diekmann, A., Jann, B. and Wyder, D., 2004. Trust and reputation in Internet auctions. 
DotEcon,  2015.  Independent  evaluation  of  the OFT’s  2006  market  study  into  the 
Commercial Use of Public Information (CUP). A report prepared for the CMA. 
Edwards, J.L., 2019. An Examination of Consumers' Social Media Trust In the Wake of the 
Facebook and Cambridge Analytica Scandal (Doctoral dissertation). 
European Commission, 2019. European legislation on open data and the re-use of public 
sector information. Policy report. 
Fecher,  B.,  Friesike,  S.,  Hebing,  M.,  Linek,  S.  and  Sauermann,  A.,  2015.  A reputation 
economy:  results  from  an  empirical  survey  on  academic  data  sharing. arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:1503.00481. 
Foster, D. and Arnold, Z., 2020. Antitrust and Artificial Intelligence: How Breaking Up Big 
Tech Could Affect the Pentagon’s Access to AI. 
Freeman, J.L., Caldwell, P.H. and Scott, K.M., 2020. The Role of Trust When Adolescents 
Search for and Appraise Online Health Information. The Journal of Pediatrics, 221, pp.215-
223. 
Gillespie, N., Dietz, G. and Lockey, S., 2014. Organizational reintegration and trust repair 
after an integrity violation: A case study. Business Ethics Quarterly. 
Goldberg,  S.,  Johnson,  G.  and  Shriver,  S.,  2019.  Regulating  Privacy  Online:  The  Early 
Impact  of  the  GDPR  on  European  Web  Traffic  &  E-Commerce  Outcomes. Available  at 
SSRN 3421731. 
Grund,   C.   and   Gürtler,   O.,   2008. The   Effect   of   Reputation   on   Selling   Prices   in 
Auctions. Jahrbucher fur Nationalokonomie & Statistik, 228(4). 
Grünewald, P. and Reisch, T., 2020. The trust gap-privacy perceptions of location data for 
energy services in the UK. Energy Research & Social Science, 68, p.101534. 
Gupta,  A.  and  Dhami,  A.,  2015.  Measuring  the  impact  of  security,  trust  and  privacy  in 
information sharing: A study on social networking sites. Journal of Direct, Data and Digital 
Marketing Practice, 17(1), pp.43-53. 
Hafen, E., 2019. Personal data cooperatives–a new data governance framework for data 
donations  and  precision  health.  In The  Ethics  of  Medical  Data  Donation (pp.  141-149). 
Springer, Cham. 

 
frontier economics  60 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Han, G. and Dong, M., 2017. Sustainable regulation of information sharing with electronic 
data interchange by a trust-embedded contract. Sustainability, 9(6), p.964. 
Hart, P. and Saunders, C., 1997. Power and trust: Critical factors in the adoption and use 
of electronic data interchange. Organization science, 8(1), pp.23-42. 
Hate, K., Meherally, S., Shah More, N., Jayaraman, A., Bull, S., Parker, M. and Osrin, D., 
2015. Sweat, skepticism, and uncharted  territory: a  qualitative study  of opinions on data 
sharing   among   public   health   researchers   and   research   participants   in   Mumbai, 
India. Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics, 10(3), pp.239-250. 
Hawlitschek, F., Stofberg, N., Teubner, T., Tu, P. and Weinhardt, C., 2018. How corporate 
sharewashing practices undermine consumer trust. Sustainability, 10(8), p.2638. 
IDC,  and  the  Lisbon  Council  2016. First  Report  on  Facts  and  Figures Updating  the 
European   Data   Market   Study Monitoring   Tool. Study   prepared   for   the   European 
Commission. 
Jakku, E., Taylor, B., Fleming, A., Mason, C., Fielke, S., Sounness, C. and Thorburn, P., 
2019.  “If  they  don’t  tell  us  what  they  do  with  it,  why  would  we  trust  them?”  Trust, 
transparency  and  benefit-sharing  in  Smart  Farming. NJAS-Wageningen  Journal  of  Life 
Sciences, 90, p.100285. 
Johnson, G., Shriver, S. and Goldberg, S., 2020. Privacy & market concentration: Intended 
& unintended consequences of the GDPR. Available at SSRN 3477686. 
Kalkman,  S.,  van  Delden,  J.,  Banerjee,  A.,  Tyl,  B.,  Mostert,  M.  and  van  Thiel,  G.,  2019. 
Patients’ and public views and attitudes towards the sharing of health data for research: a 
narrative review of the empirical evidence. Journal of medical ethics. 
Kamvar,   S., Schlosser,   M and   Garcia-Molina,   H.,   2003.   EigenRep:   Reputation 
management in P2P networks. 
Layton,  R.,  2017.  How  the  GDPR  compares  to  best  practices  for  privacy,  accountability 
and trust. Accountability and Trust (March 31, 2017). 
Lee,  J.N.,  Huynh,  M.Q.  and  Hirschheim,  R.,  2008.  An  integrative  model  of  trust  on  IT 
outsourcing:  Examining  a  bilateral  perspective. Information  Systems  Frontiers, 10(2), 
pp.145-163. 
Liao, K., Ma, Z., Lee, J.J.Y. and Ke, K., 2011. Achieving mass customization through trust‐
driven information sharing: a supplier's perspective. Management research review. 
Linek, S.B., Fecher, B., Friesike, S. and Hebing, M., 2017. Data sharing as social dilemma: 
Influence of the researcher’s personality. PloS one, 12(8), p.e0183216. 
Lippert, S.K. and Swiercz, P.M., 2007. Personal Data Collection via the Internet: The Role 
of  Privacy  Sensitivity  and  Technology  Trust. Journal  of  International  Technology  and 
Information Management, 16(1), p.2. 
Lu, W., Xu, F. and Lv, J., 2010. An approach of software reliability evaluation in the open 
environment. Chinese Journal of Computers, 33(3), pp.452-462. 
Lu,  Y., Wang, W.,  Bhargava,  B.  and  Xu,  D.,  2006.  Trust-based  privacy  preservation  for 
peer-to-peer data sharing. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: 
Systems and Humans, 36(3), pp.498-502. 
Lv, D. and Zhu, S., 2020. Achieving secure big data collection based on trust evaluation 
and true data discovery. Computers & Security, 96, p.101937. 
Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Ramge, T., 2018. A Big Choice for Big Tech: Share Data or 
Suffer the Consequences. Foreign Aff., 97, p.48. 

 
frontier economics  61 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
McKinsey, 2013. Open data: Unlocking innovation and performance with liquid information.  
McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V. and Kacmar, C., 2002. The impact of initial consumer trust 
on  intentions  to  transact  with  a  web  site:  a  trust  building  model. The  journal  of  strategic 
information systems, 11(3-4), pp.297-323. 
Meijer,  R.,  Conradie,  P.  and Choenni, S., 2014. Reconciling contradictions  of open data 
regarding  transparency,  privacy,  security  and  trust. Journal  of  theoretical  and  applied 
electronic commerce research, 9(3), pp.32-44. 
Milne,  R., Morley,  K.I.,  Howard,  H.,  Niemiec,  E.,  Nicol,  D.,  Critchley,  C.,  Prainsack,  B., 
Vears, D., Smith, J., Steed, C. and Bevan, P., 2019. Trust in genomic data sharing among 
members   of   the   general   public   in   the   UK,   USA,   Canada   and   Australia. Human 
genetics, 138(11), pp.1237-1246. 
Moon,  L.A.,  2017.  Factors  influencing  health  data  sharing  preferences  of  consumers:  A 
critical review. Health policy and technology, 6(2), pp.169-187. 
Mulder, T. and  Broekstra,  R.B., 2019. Does the GDPR Have Trust Issues?. Available at 
SSRN 3506807. 
Muravyeva,  E.,  Janssen,  J.,  Dirkx,  K.  and  Specht,  M.,  2020,  July.  The  Role  of  Trust  in 
Personal  Data  Sharing  in  the  Context  of  e-Assessment  and  the  Moderating  Effect  of 
Special  Educational  Needs.  In Proceedings  of  the  28th  ACM  Conference  on  User 
Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (pp. 328-332). 
Murphy,  H.,  Keahey,  L.,  Bennett,  E.,  Drake,  A.,  Brooks,  S.K.  and  Rubin,  G.J.,  2020. 
Millennial  attitudes  towards  sharing  mobile  phone  location  data  with  health  agencies:  a 
qualitative study. Information, Communication & Society, pp.1-14. 
Nasser,  A.A.N.,  2020.  Impacts  of  Trust  in  Government  and  Privacy  Risk  Concern  on 
Willingness  to  Provide  Personal  Information  in  Saudi  Arabia. International  Journal  of 
Management Science and Business Administration, 6(2), pp.7-18. 
Neves, A.L., Poovendran, D., Freise, L., Ghafur, S., Flott, K., Darzi, A. and Mayer, E.K., 
2019. Health Care Professionals’ Perspectives on the Secondary Use of Health Records 
to  Improve  Quality  and  Safety  of  Care  in  England:  Qualitative  Study. Journal  of  medical 
Internet research, 21(9), p.e14135. 
Nicolaou, A.I. and McKnight, D.H., 2006. Perceived information quality in data exchanges: 
Effects  on  risk,  trust,  and  intention  to  use. Information  systems  research, 17(4),  pp.332-
351. 
O’Hara, K., 2019. Data Trusts: Ethics, Architecture and Governance for Trustworthy Data 
Stewardship. Web Science Institute White Paper. 
OECD,  2015. Assessing government  initiatives on public sector  information. A review  of 
the OECD Council Recommendation. OECD Digital Economy Papers. 
Open  Data  Institute  and  Nuffield  Foundation,  2020. Valuing  data:  foundations  for  data 
policy. 
Open Data Institute, 2019. How we developed a model of data sharing in the economy. 
Ostherr, K., Borodina, S., Bracken, R.C., Lotterman, C., Storer, E. and Williams, B., 2017. 
Trust and privacy in the context of user-generated health data. Big Data & Society, 4(1), 
p.2053951717704673. 
Özer,    Ö.,    Zheng,    Y.    and    Chen,    K.Y.,    2011.    Trust    in    forecast    information 
sharing. Management Science, 57(6), pp.1111-1137. 
Patel, M.S., 2019. Merger Breakups. Available at SSRN 3469984. 

 
frontier economics  62 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Peral, J., Gallego, E., Gil, D., Tanniru, M. and Khambekar, P., 2020. Using Visualization to 
Build Transparency in a Healthcare Blockchain Application. Sustainability, 12(17), p.6768. 
Porcedda, M.G. and Wall, D.S., 2019. Cascade and Chain Effects in Big Data Cybercrime: 
Lessons from the TalkTalk hack, proceedings of WACCO 2019: 1st Workshop on Attackers 
and Cyber-Crime Operations, IEEE EuroS&P 2019, Stockholm, Sweden, June 20, 2019. 
Przepiorka, W., 2013. Buyers pay for and sellers invest in a good reputation: More evidence 
from eBay. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 42, pp.31-42. 
Rissman,  A.R.,  Morris,  A.W.,  Kalinin,  A.,  Kohl,  P.A.,  Parker,  D.P.  and  Selles,  O.,  2019. 
Private organizations,  public  data:  Land  trust  choices  about  mapping  conservation 
easements. Land Use Policy, 89, p.104221. 
Rumbold,  J.M.M.  and  Pierscionek,  B.,  2017.  The  effect  of  the  general  data  protection 
regulation on medical research. Journal of medical Internet research, 19(2), p.e47. 
Sanderson,  S.C.,  Brothers,  K.B.,  Mercaldo,  N.D.,  Clayton,  E.W.,  Antommaria,  A.H.M., 
Aufox, S.A., Brilliant, M.H., Campos, D., Carrell, D.S., Connolly, J. and Conway, P., 2017. 
Public  attitudes  toward  consent  and  data  sharing  in biobank  research:  a  large  multi-site 
experimental survey in the US. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 100(3), pp.414-
427. 
Sandhaus, S., Kaufmann, D. and Ramirez-Andreotta, M., 2019. Public participation, trust 
and  data  sharing:  gardens  as  hubs  for  citizen  science  and  environmental  health  literacy 
efforts. International Journal of Science Education, Part B, 9(1), pp.54-71. 
Savona,  M.,  2020.  The  Saga  of  the  Covid-19  Contact  Tracing  Apps:  Lessons  for  Data 
Governance. 
Schneider, M.J., Jagpal, S., Gupta, S., Li, S. and Yu, Y., 2017. Protecting customer privacy 
when    marketing    with    second-party    data. International    Journal    of    Research    in 
Marketing, 34(3), pp.593-603. 
Shipman,  F.M.  and  Marshall,  C.C.,  2020,  April.  Ownership,  Privacy,  and  Control  in  the 
Wake  of Cambridge  Analytica:  The  Relationship  between  Attitudes  and  Awareness. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
1-12). 
Steedman,  R.,  Kennedy,  H.  and  Jones,  R.,  2020.  Complex  ecologies  of  trust  in  data 
practices and data-driven systems. Information, Communication & Society, pp.1-16. 
Stone, M.A., Redsell, S.A., Ling, J.T. and Hay, A.D., 2005. Sharing patient data: competing 
demands  of  privacy,  trust  and  research  in  primary  care. British  journal  of  general 
practice, 55(519), pp.783-789. 
Tasman,  A.C.I.L.,  2009.  Spatial  information  in  the  New  Zealand  economy.  Realising 
productivity gains. prepared for Land Information New Zealand, pp.77-95. 
Urban,  T.,  Tatang,  D.,  Degeling,  M.,  Holz,  T.  and  Pohlmann,  N.,  2020.  Measuring the 
Impact  of  the  GDPR  on  Data  Sharing  in  Ad  Networks.  In Proceedings  of  the  15th  ACM 
ASIA Conference on Computer and Communications Security, ASIA CCS (Vol. 20). 
Walker,  J.,  Simperl,  E.,  Stalla-Bourdillon,  S.  and  O’Hara,  K.,  2019.  Decision  making 
processes for data sharing: a framework for data trusts. 
Wallis, J.C., Rolando, E. and Borgman, C.L., 2013. If we share data, will anyone use them? 
Data  sharing  and  reuse  in  the  long  tail  of  science  and  technology. PloS  one, 8(7), 
p.e67332. 
Wang, Y., Cai, Z., Yin, G., Gao, Y., Tong, X. and Han, Q., 2016. A game theory-based trust 
measurement model for social networks. Computational social networks, 3(1), p.2. 

 
frontier economics  63 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Welch, E.W., Feeney, M.K. and Park, C.H., 2016. Determinants of data sharing in US city 
governments. Government Information Quarterly, 33(3), pp.393-403. 
Williams, H., Spencer, K., Sanders, C., Lund, D., Whitley, E.A., Kaye, J. and Dixon, W.G., 
2015. Dynamic consent: a possible solution to improve patient confidence and trust in how 
electronic  patient  records are  used  in  medical  research. JMIR  medical  informatics, 3(1), 
p.e3. 
Wiseman, L., Sanderson, J., Zhang, A. and Jakku, E., 2019. Farmers and their data: An 
examination  of  farmers’  reluctance  to  share  their  data  through  the  lens  of  the  laws 
impacting smart farming. NJAS-Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences, 90, p.100301. 
Xiong, L. and Liu, L., 2004. Peertrust: Supporting reputation-based trust for peer-to-peer 
electronic  communities. IEEE  transactions  on  Knowledge  and  Data  Engineering, 16(7), 
pp.843-857. 
Xuan, S., Zheng, L., Chung, I., Wang, W., Man, D., Du, X., Yang, W. and Guizani, M., 2020. 
An    incentive    mechanism    for    data    sharing    based    on    blockchain    with    smart 
contracts. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 83, p.106587. 
Yuan, W., Jian, L., Feng, X. and Lin, Z., 2006, April. A trust measurement and evolution 
model for internetware. In Journal of software. 
Zhang, J., Hassandoust, F. and Williams, J.E., 2020. Online Customer Trust in the Context 
of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Pacific Asia Journal of the Association 
for Information Systems, 12(1), p.4. 
Zhang, Y., Wang, T. and Hsu, C., 2019. The effects of voluntary GDPR adoption and the 
readability  of  privacy  statements  on  customers’  information  disclosure  intention  and 
trust. Journal of Intellectual Capital. 
Zhao, J., Zhu, C., Peng, Z., Xu, X. and Liu, Y., 2018. User willingness toward knowledge 
sharing in social networks. Sustainability, 10(12), p.4680. 
 
 
 

 
frontier economics  64 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
ANNEX A ADDITIONAL DETAIL ON 
EVIDENCE REVIEW AND 
ANALYTIC STRATEGY  
A.1 Search strategy 
We  carried  out  a rigorous  review  of  available  publications  through  database 
searches.  We  explored  some  of  the  most  comprehensive  academic  databases 
providing  literature  at  the  intersection  between  multiple  disciplines,  including 
economics,   policy,   computer   science,   social   science   and   ethics/applied 
philosophy.  
Key databases we explored include JSTOR, RePEc, EconLit, ScienceDirect and 
Google Scholar. Our search terms include multiple combinations of the following 
search terms: 
 trust (or synonym) AND 
 data OR 
 data sharing AND  
 impact (or synonym) AND 
 health OR 
 financial (OR banking) OR 
 mobility OR 
 data trust + impact 
For  each  database/keyword  combination,  we  have  reviewed  the  top  40  search 
results (for queries returning more than 40 results) and identified the most relevant 
ones  based  on a  review  of  the  abstract. In  doing  so  we  have  considered  all 
academic papers, research and policy articles, and excluded book chapters and 
news articles. Amongst the research identified, we excluded all papers that: 
 proposed new approaches to trustworthy data sharing without considering its 
impact on data sharing/collection/use; 
 investigated the relationship between trust and knowledge sharing (based on 
our  key  words,  the  database  search  returned  a  high  volume  of  publications 
about this in the management and organisation literature), as this was deemed 
not relevant to inform our research question. 
As  a  result  of  this  process,  we  identified  a  pool  of 56 studies  to  be  reviewed.  A 
breakdown of our query results are shown in Figure 28 below. 
 
 
 

 
frontier economics  65 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Figure 28 Database search results 
Number of studies identified  Ideas 
Repec 
Science 
Direct 
Google 
Scholar 
Jstor Total 
trust (or synonym) + data + 
impact (or synonym) 
4 4 #N/A 3 11 
trust (or synonym) + data 
sharing (or "data sharing") 
+impact (or synonym) 
11 4 14 0 29 
trust + data (or data sharing) + 
impact (or synonym) + health 
4 1 1 0 6 
trust + data (or data sharing) + 
impact (or synonym) + 
financial (or banking) 
1 1 2 0 4 
trust + data (or data sharing) + 
impact (or synonym) + mobility 
1 0 2 0 3 
trust + data (or data collection) 
+ impact (or synonym) + 
health 
#N/A #N/A 0 #N/A 0 
trust + data (or data use) + 
impact (or synonym) + health 
#N/A 1 1 #N/A 2 
data trust + impact #N/A #N/A 1 #N/A 1 
Total 21 11 21 3 56 
 
Source: Frontier Economics research 
Note: #NA means that we did not conduct a given key word search on that particular database 
We  have  also  carried  out  ad-hoc online searches  informed  by  our  domain 
knowledge  and  guided  by ODI suggestions,  which  returned  an  additional 29 
relevant studies, including studies published by government department and think 
tanks.  
  

 
frontier economics  66 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
A.2 Highly relevant papers identified 
As set out in Section 1.2.1, we classified these papers into high, medium and low 
relevance. The criteria we used to identify highly relevant studies are the following: 
 the research question is highly relevant to inform the relationship between trust, 
data sharing/collection/use and subsequent economic impacts. 
 the  methodology  includes  an  assessment  of  the  impact  of  trust  on  data 
sharing/collection/use, or the economic impact of data sharing/collection use.  
 The  assessment  is  quantitative  in  almost  all  cases.  Where  surveys  are 
conducted,  the  sample  size  is  large  enough  to  draw  meaningful  statistical 
conclusions.  If  qualitative,  the  assessment  is  highly  rigorous  and  is  able  to 
isolate the impact of changes in trust on data sharing. 
 the  type  of  trust  linkages  and  types  of  actors  under  analysis  are  easily 
identifiable. 
 The study was conducted post 2010. 
The table below reports details for the 21 highly academic studies we classified as 
‘highly relevant’, including sector, geography, methodology and research question. 
Figure 29 Highly relevant academic studies 
Title 
Author 
(year) 
Geography Sector Methodology Research question 
Measuring the impact of 
security, trust and privacy 
in information sharing: A 
study on social networking 
sites 
Gupta (2015) 
 
NA Social 
media 
Quantitative 
survey 
Understand the impact of 
security, trust and privacy 
concerns on willingness to 
share information on social 
networking sites. 
RQ1: What are the 
antecedents of trust in social 
networking sites? 
RQ2: What is the impact of 
privacy, security, and trust on 
the willingness of sharing 
information? 
Here’s my location, for your 
information: The impact of 
trust, benefits, and social 
influence on location 
sharing application use 
among Indonesian 
university students 
Beldad (2015) Indonesia location 
data 
Quantitative 
survey 
Investigating the impact of 
trust, benefits, and social 
influence on location sharing 
application use among 
Indonesian university 
students. 
Trust and cooperative 
behavior: Evidence from 
the realm of data-sharing 
Bauer (2019) Germany social 
media, 
acade
mic 
researc
h 
Quantitative 
survey 
Investigate the relationship 
between trust and cooperation 
(measured by data sharing) 
Public Attitudes toward 
Consent and Data Sharing 
in Biobank Research: A 
Large Multi-site 
Experimental Survey in the 
US 
Sanderson 
(2017) 
US Health 
Quantitative 
survey 
Assess willingness to 
participate in a biobank using 
different consent and data 
sharing models. 

 
frontier economics  67 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Title 
Author 
(year) 
Geography Sector Methodology Research question 
The trust gap: Social 
perceptions of privacy data 
for energy services in the 
United Kingdom 
Grunewald 
and Reisch 
(2020) 
UK energy Quantiative 
survey 
Investigate attitudes towards 
location data sharing in the 
context of energy smart 
solutions (smart meters). 
Consumer propensity to 
adopt PSD2 services: trust 
for sale? 
Bijlsma et al 
(2020) 
Netherlands banking Quantiative 
survey 
Study consumers’ attitudes 
towards sharing payments 
data with incumbent and new 
providers of payment and 
account information services, 
and using their services, to 
understand the impact of the 
revised Payment Services 
Directive (PSD2) on the 
functioning of the retail 
payments market. 
Impacts of Trust in 
Government and Privacy 
Risk Concern on 
Willingness to Provide 
Personal Information in 
Saudi Arabia 
Nasser  (2020) Saudi Arabia   Quantitative Estimate the impacts of trust in 
government and privacy risk 
concern on willingness to 
provide personal information. 
Building trust and sharing 
value: the twin challenges 
of health and care data 
Mac Manus, 
(2019) 
NA health Qualitative 
review 
Review of several events 
involving breaches of trust or 
the relationship between trust 
and data sharing more 
generally, in the context of 
healthcare data. 
Trust and privacy in the 
context of user-generated 
health data 
Ostherr (2017) US Health Qualitative, 
semi-structured 
interviews 
Analysing concern about 
sharing health data with the 
companies that sold the 
devices or apps they used. 
Reconciling Contradictions 
of Open Data Regarding 
Transparency, Privacy, 
Security and Trust 
Meijer et al 
(2014) 
Netherlands 
govern
ment, 
researc
h 
Theoretical 
model and case 
study application 
Analysing pre-commitment as 
a policy instrument whereby 
an organization imposes some 
restraints on its policy in order 
to restrict the extent to which 
values may conflict and the 
degree to which stakeholders 
should be concerned about 
the trustworthiness of that 
policy. 
Private organizations, 
public data: Land trust 
choices about mapping 
conservation easements 
Rissman et al 
(2019) 
US Land 
conserv
ation 
Quantitative 
survey 
Focus on decisions by land 
conservation NGOs (land 
trusts) to share digital maps of 
conservation easements on 
private lands. Investigation of 
which land trusts were more 
likely to contribute digital maps 
to public databases, and what 
benefits and concerns with 
disclosure did land trust staff 
report. 
Farmers and their data: An 
examination of farmers’ 
reluctance to share their 
data through the lens of the 
laws impacting smart 
farming 
Wiseman 
(2019) 
Australia Agricult
ure 
Quantitative 
survey 
Examining the attitudes of 
farmers to the collection, 
control, sharing and use of 
their farm data. 

 
frontier economics  68 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Title 
Author 
(year) 
Geography Sector Methodology Research question 
Sustainable Regulation of 
Information Sharing with 
Electronic Data 
Interchange by a Trust-
Embedded Contract 
Han and Dong 
(2017) 
NA Private 
sector 
Theoretical 
model + 
experiments 
Studying the risks in demand 
information sharing 
applications by electronic soft-
orders using electronic data 
interchange (EDI) systems in 
e-commerce and aims to 
suggest a sustainable 
regulation mechanism with a 
trust-embedded contract. 
Achieving mass 
customization through 
trust-driven information 
sharing: a supplier's 
perspective 
Kun Liao et al 
(2011) 
North 
America 
private 
sector 
Quantitative 
Survey 
Testing empirically the 
relationship between trust and 
manufacturer-supplier 
information sharing to 
determine its (positive) effect 
on mass customization. 
Determinants of data 
sharing in U.S. city 
governments 
Welch (2016) US govern
ment 
Qualitative 
review 
Testing hypotheses predicting 
sharing behaviour of municipal 
government agencies with 
other agencies and with non-
government organizations 
Ownership, Privacy, and 
Control in the Wake of 
Cambridge Analytica: The 
Relationship between 
Attitudes and Awareness 
Shipman 
(2020) 
US Social 
media 
Quantitative 
survey 
Investigating whether 
widespread news of abuse 
changed the public’s 
perceptions of how user-
contributed content from social 
networking sites like Facebook 
and LinkedIn can be used 
Should I stay or should I 
leave? exploring the 
(dis)continued Facebook 
use after the Cambridge 
Analytica scandal 
Brown (2020) US Social 
media 
Qualitative semi-
structured 
interviews 
Analysing decisions to stay 
with or leave Facebook 
following the Cambridge 
Analytica case as such 
decisions intersect with privacy 
concerns. 
Privacy & Market 
Concentration: Intended & 
Unintended Consequences 
of the GDPR 
Johnson et al 
(2020) 
EU online 
website
s/web 
technol
ogy 
vendor
s 
Quantitative Estimate the impact of GDPR 
enforcement on data sharing, 
by examining website choices 
of web technology vendors 
(platforms like FB and Google) 
in response to the European 
Union (EU) enforcing the 
GDPR. 
Regulating Privacy Online: 
The Early Impact of the 
GDPR on European Web 
Traffic & E-Commerce 
Outcomes 
Goldberg et al 
(2019) 
EU online 
traffic 
Quantitative Examining the impact of the 
GDPR on European web 
traffic and e-commerce sales. 
Measuring the Impact of 
the GDPR on Data Sharing 
in Ad Networks 
Urban et al 
(2020) 
EU online 
traffic 
Quantitative Analysing the underlying 
information sharing networks 
between online advertising 
companies in terms of client-
side cookie syncing. 

 
frontier economics  69 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Title 
Author 
(year) 
Geography Sector Methodology Research question 
The effects of voluntary 
GDPR adoption and the 
readability of privacy 
statements on customers’ 
information disclosure 
intention and trust 
Zhang (2019) EU   Quantitative Examining the impacts of 
companies’ voluntary adoption 
of the General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) as well as 
the readability of privacy 
statements on US customers’ 
intention to disclose 
information and their trust in a 
company. 
Source:  Frontier Economics  

 
frontier economics  70 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
A.3 Estimates calibration 
As noted in Section 3.2.2, eight studies amongst those we have reviewed provide 
a direct quantified estimate of the impact of trust on data sharing, of which seven 
studies were directly comparable and therefore formed the core of our evidence 
base.  
To make estimates comparable and draw aggregate impacts, we standardise each 
coefficient to align with the following relationship: a 1 point increase on a 5 point 
trust Likert scale leads to a X point increase on a 5 point data sharing Likert scale. 
The table below reports the details for each study which we used to complete the 
standardisation of estimates. As displayed in the table, most studies measure trust 
and data sharing on a 5 point Likert scale, therefore, the coefficient estimate will 
be of the type ‘categorical variable (x) on categorical variable (y)’. These estimates 
are therefore already fully comparable. To bring them in line with the others, we 
have converted the ‘categorical variable (x) on binary variable (y)’ estimates from 
the Bauer (2019) and the Bijlsma (2020) studies by applying simple proportions. 
Figure 30 Estimates standardisation 
Paper Estimatio
n 
technique 
Trust 
meas
urem
ent 
Data 
sharin
g 
measu
rement 
Coefficient 
type 
Basel
ine 
trust 
level 
Impact 
of trust 
on data 
sharing 
(standar
dized) 
Sam
ple 
size 
Internal 
validity 
score 
Nasser 
(2020) 
regression  5 
point 
likert 
scale 
5 point 
likert 
scale 
categorical 
on 
categorical 
NA 0.59 268 1 
Wisem
an 
(2019) 
regression  5 
point 
likert 
scale 
5 point 
likert 
scale 
categorical 
on 
categorical 
2.41 0.33 1000 1 
Gupta 
(2015) 
regression  5 
point 
likert 
scale 
5 point 
likert 
scale 
categorical 
on 
categorical 
NA 0.25 250 4 
Liao  
(2011) 
pearson 
correlation  
5 
point 
likert 
scale 
5 point 
likert 
scale 
categorical 
on 
categorical 
NA 0.24 208 3 
Bauer 
(2019) 
regression  3 
point 
scale 
binary categorical 
on binary 
3 0.21 2095 2 
Beldad 
(2015) 
regression  
5 
point 
likert 
scale 
5 point 
likert 
scale 
categorical 
on 
categorical 
3.54 0.14 655 2 
Bijlsma 
(2020) 
regression  5 
point 
likert 
scale 
binary categorical 
on binary 
NA 0.11 2678 5 
Source:  Frontier Economics 
Note: *pps indicates percentage points 

 
frontier economics  71 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
Almost  all  of the studies considered estimate  the  relationship  between  trust  and 
data sharing through a regression coefficient. Instead, Liao (2011) estimates the 
relationship between trust and data sharing as a Pearson correlation coefficient, 
i.e. a coefficient bounded between -1 and 1, which gives an indication of how trust 
(x variable) and data sharing (y variable) move together, but is unable to measure 
the impact of a change in trust on data sharing. However, the methodology used 
in  this  study  makes  the  correlation  estimate  comparable  to  the  other  regression 
coefficients.
63
 In  the  table  below  we  provide  guidance  on  how  to  interpret 
econometric regression coefficients. 
  
 
 
63
  To convert a correlation coefficient into a regression coefficient, one needs to know the variances of x and y. 
Since the Liao study measures both trust and data sharing on the same scale, it is plausible that their 
variances are equal, in which case the regression and correlation coefficients are equal. 

 
frontier economics  72 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
 
INTERPRETING REGRESSION RESULTS 
To aid the interpretation of the coefficients resulting from the regression estimation techniques 
reported above, consider the following simplified example.  
The below is a linear probability model estimating the impact of the independent variable (or 
regressor) of interest x1 (in our case, trust) on a dependent variable y (in our case, data sharing), 
where e is an error term capturing any residual ‘noise’ in the estimation.  
y = a + bx1 + e 
In this case, the coefficient of the impact of trust on data sharing b will capture the impact of a 1 
unit increase in trust on data sharing. However, this coefficient does not necessarily capture the 
causal impact of trust on data sharing.  
The reason why this might be the case is that there are likely factors influencing data sharing 
other than trust which, if not taken into account as additional regressors, are likely to cause a bias 
in the impact estimate b. To mitigate for this, many of the studies reviewed estimated linear 
probability model regressions which also included other determinants of data sharing (or control 
variables). For example, by adding a control for the implementation of another determinant of 
data sharing x2 to the regression: 
y = a + bx1 + cx2 + e 
might make the estimation of b more precise (b will now capture the impact of x1 as separated 
from the impact of x2). This means that, in these cases, the impact estimate b approximates the 
true impact of trust more closely than those models without other controls (and for this reason we 
have considered studies with controls as more robust). 
Nonetheless, linear probability models are still unlikely to capture the causal impact of trust on 
data sharing. 
Another reason why a linear probability model might not capture the true impact of trust on data 
sharing is what is referred to as reverse causality in applied statistics and econometrics. In the 
case at hand, we expect that: 
 In most cases, economic theory suggests that trust (x1) is a driver of impact for data sharing 
(y) - if trust is increased, then this will lead to more data sharing, i.e. causality; 
 It might also be the case that greater data sharing (y) allows more trust to begin with (x1) – to 
some extent, data sharing could be a driver of trust, i.e. reverse causality. 
Reverse causality cannot be fully accounted for by linear probability models. Only more 
sophisticated techniques exploiting exogenous and unanticipated shocks in trust (x1, the 
independent variable) are able to capture the causal impact of trust on data sharing. There is 
extensive econometric literature employing these more sophisticated methods (for example, 
randomized control trials, difference-in-differences designs, regression discontinuity designs, or 
the use of instrumental variables). Some of the academic studies included in this review employ 
more sophisticated techniques and are better able to approximate the causal impact of trust - we 
have therefore assigned a higher robustness (or internal validity) score. In addition, as outlined in 
Section 3.4, by analysing a set of natural experiments (i.e. examples of breaches in trust like 
Cambridge Analytica and of increases in trust like the GDPR) we were able, although mostly 
based on ad hoc statistics and anecdotal evidence rather than on robust econometric studies, to 
test the direction of causality. That is, we have assessed whether changes in trust result in 
changes in data sharing behaviour over time. 

 
frontier economics  73 
 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TRUST IN DATA ECOSYSTEMS 
  
 
www.frontier-economics.com 