

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/1/18
Image: Copyright Adobe Stock
What organisations need in order to share more data: our
research
Fri Oct 26, 2018
Share
Data infrastructure Data publishing and use Innovation
Knowledge & opinion > Reports >

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/2/18
We speak to businesses about their challenges in data sharing and how they can
be supported
As part of an R&D project exploring how to increase access to data while retaining
trust, ODI User Researcher Lisa Perez spoke to businesses to discover their key
challenges in data sharing, and explore how they can be better supported. Here are
her findings
In June and July 2018, the ODI interviewed people who work for organisations
which share or publish data, or who have expert knowledge of data sharing
practices in specific industries.
The interviews were intended to answer the following questions:
What challenges do organisations face when sharing data?
What models are currently in use?
What new models are being proposed?
What sectors should we investigate further?
The outcomes of the research will help us to identify sectors and problems which
the ODI could work on for maximum impact. This report summarises the key
findings from this research stage.
Nine one-hour interviews were conducted over Google hangouts. Interviewees
represented the following industry sectors:
Fintech (1)
Extractives (2, representing one organisation)
Transport (2, including one with specific focus on autonomous vehicles)
Healthcare (2)
Environment (2, from the Environment Agency)
Participants were recruited primarily through known contacts, direct requests, and
social media. The research is exploratory, not exhaustive, and indicates issues and
solutions experienced by individuals working in the selected sectors.
The five sectors varied considerably in the degree to which data was shared and in
the willingness to share more. For example, the healthcare sector is people-
focussed with significant privacy concerns about highly-personal data. Conversely,
the transport industry has many demonstrated success stories and a general
recognition of the value of opening data.
Despite differences, the sectors shared some similar challenges suggesting the
possibility to learn from emerging models and solutions in other sectors. Part I of
this report describes cross-sector themes, challenges, and emerging sharing
models, while Part II highlights sector-specific issues.

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/3/18
Part I: Overall findings
Challenges
Data discovery
Interviewees experienced challenges in finding relevant data, particularly when only
limited data is shared or made public and when data is published in unstructured
and inconsistent formats in disperse locations. This was a problem in the
extractives and healthcare sectors.
Data control and access
The need to resolve issues of data control and access among multiple competing
stakeholders was seen as a barrier to sharing. In the automotive industry, it’s not
clear who should control data generated by modern automobiles. Access to the
data could be claimed by drivers, passengers, car owners, car manufacturers,
software or hardware providers, or the wider transport network. Similarly in the
extractives industry, there are differing views on who controls or has access to data
about deposits and reserves – the government, the extraction company, the public,
or international bodies. The issue becomes further complicated when data includes
a personal component. What data should an individual control or own?
Resolving these issues may require an unaccustomed degree of collaboration and
sharing among otherwise competing parties and a shift of organisational or industry
culture may be required before any technical solution can be effective. Slow
progress in meaningful sharing of healthcare data is an example of halting
progress. Similarly, the transport sector may need higher degrees of cooperation
and data sharing to join separate networks and enable increased transport usage
and industry growth.
Managing data as infrastructure will require resolving multiple overlapping data
rights each with their own motivations and challenges. Read more in a paper the
ODI CEO, Jeni Tennison recently wrote for the UK Centre for Data Ethics.
Trust
There is hardly any structured data available in a, kind of,
wider scale or scope
“
”
Who’s going to get the value?
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/4/18
Trust in data quality is dependent, in part, on the credibility of its source. This is
particularly important in extractives where trust is low throughout the sector. Both
extractive companies and some governments are assumed to be acting in their
own interests rather than the public interest. Companies aren’t trusted to released
unbiased data and data released by governments who aren’t see to be generally
credible will not be trusted. However, this varies by sector. In the Autonomous
Vehicles sector, data from local authorities may be seen as more trustworthy than
data from a private company.
One way Transport for London gained consumer trust for the Oyster card system
was by solving customer problems quickly and issuing refunds instantly where
needed, thus increasing customer willingness to allow TfL access to individual
journey and payment data.
Public trust can be damaged by data breaches, so successful sharing models must
include robust data security technology and governance. One interviewee felt that
the technical standards for regulated parties in the payment services directive
(PSD2) were currently too weak, making a data breach more likely.
Consumers will also lose trust where they feel they have been misled. The NHS
experience with care.data showed the consequences of failing to earn the trust of
stakeholders by rushing to share data without robust data governance processes in
place. The Caldicott enquiry that followed highlighted the importance of rigorous
data governance policies in establishing trust. While this example is from the
healthcare sector, it could apply to other sectors dealing with highly sensitive data.
Transparency
Transparency is often opposed by those who feel they or their organisation will be
There’s signific ant Problems on the PSD2 regulation when
it comes to trust, because of the way the payment services
regulation and payment service directive was written
“
”
People own the resources, they should know about what
their governments do ...  so that they can hold both
companies and their governments accountable
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/5/18
seen negatively if data is released. This issue crosses sectors, from government
resource departments unused to detailed public scrutiny, to NHS GPs concerned
about the use of league tables. Within any environment however, there will be
natural allies of data sharing. Revenue authorities may be more interested in
opening details of extractive activities than the departments working more closely
with extractive companies. When discussions about healthcare data sharing have
included both patients and GPs, GPs have been more willing to share data when
they directly see patient support.
Business cases
Many organisations lack knowledge of business models that would support greater
degrees of data sharing. One interviewee felt that in the rapidly-evolving transport
sector there aren’t enough successful examples to overcome the reservations of
risk-averse managers. In the historically secretive extractive industry, organisations
typically only see downsides of sharing  data that they have always viewed as
commercially sensitive. When extractive organisations do share data, the terms of
the sharing agreement are rarely made public so the industry lacks good examples
to learn from. Furthermore, examples can take time to develop whereas the
downsides of data sharing, e.g. resources required, are usually more immediately
apparent.
Personal data
Many organisations and sectors struggle with how to make effective legal use of
personally-identifiable data. The lack of test cases of GDPR has led to
organisations being very cautious. People who have historically dealt with
confidential data may be reluctant to share that data even when there is a clear
legal basis. One interviewee remarked that data protection is often used as an
excuse not to share data.
Anonymisation in particular is both a technical and a cultural issue. Data publishers
and decision makers may not understand the anonymisation spectrum or feel
ffi i  tl i f   d t d ik d i i   b  t d tti
We’re destroying traditional business models and creating
new ones at the same time and that is not straightforward
or easy
“
”
If you’re doing something on population-level, consent just
would not be feasible
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/6/18
sufficiently informed to design or make decisions about data aggregation or
anonymisation processes.  Interviewees from the Environment and Healthcare
sectors raised this issue, but it could affect any sector which deals with personal
data.
Possible solutions
Effective data sharing requires the motivation and willingness to do so as well as
the technical and management skills to implement it effectively.
Changing market conditions will be one impetus for data sharing. Examples from
ATMs and mobile phone networks in the past have shown how organisations
shared data in order to make these systems work for customers and grow the
market. Legislation and government policy that requires or enables data sharing will
also have an effect, though some feel that legislation works too slowly to take
advantage of technical innovation.
Successful examples of data sharing can demonstrate benefits to market players
and influence sharing throughout the sector. However if details of data sharing
agreements are themselves not made public, their impact will be muted. Hence a
trend for extractive companies to publish contract terms could be an important step
to greater openness in that sector.
Long-term stakeholder engagement to enable culture change was seen by
healthcare sector interviewees as essential to increased data sharing in healthcare.
Lessons learned in this sector could prove useful to other sectors. Discussions with
GPs and patients about data sharing and with clinicians and researchers about
data collection, management, and use were suggested. Accountability and  data
governance needs to be developed together with stakeholders to ensure it works
for all.
Data sharing models
Current examples
The UK Environment Agency now considers data sharing whenever a new
dataset is created. They use a checklist to help managers determine which
data can be shared with an open license and which needs a more restrictive
license.
Oil companies sometimes share data about their resources in order to attract
or reassure investors
Both transport companies (such as Uber) and extractive companies may share
some data publicly or with regulators in hopes of pre-empting increased
regulation.
The Open Banking regulatory framework allows existing financial institutions
and new organisations to share financial data for the benefit of consumers
The NHS does not have centralised data governance, it allows individual trusts
to make independent agreements.

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/7/18
New models
New models are being suggested and tried within the transport and autonomous
vehicles sector. If market players do not cooperate, a model of competing
ecosystems led by a few major players may develop.
The importance of high quality training data for autonomous vehicles shows the
potential for public bodies to license CCTV and other relevant data to industry
entrants.
Synthetic data sets of edge cases used for training autonomous vehicles are a
candidate for sharing amongst developers as it is likely to increase car safety,
leading to the market acceptance which will be necessary for industry growth.
Part II: Summary by sector
Healthcare
Challenges:
Data quality is not always adequate for research due to varied formats and
schemas
Confidentiality and trust are significant issues and hindered by cases like
care.data where communication and acceptance was poor
There is a lack of consensus on data sharing models – whether consent-
based, anonymised, aggregated, or open but managed.
Possible solutions:
Engagement and discussions with patients, clinicians, researches, and the
general public
Electronic healthcare records designed with clinicians, patients, and
researchers in mind.
Successes:
The Moorfields agreement with Deepmind publicly shows the benefits of sharing
anonymised medical data
Impact:
Resource efficiency
Treatment effectiveness
D  lt  d t ti   f   t  t   t
Information governance is 9/10ths cultural
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/8/18
Development and testing of new treatments.
UK Environment Agency (EA)
Challenges:
Third-party licenses (e.g. Met Office, OS) limit data that can be made open
Few dedicated internal resources to help managers make decisions about data
publishing
Reluctance to find solutions for sharing data with personally identifiable
content.
Possible solutions:
Published examples of people and organisations using EA data help to embed
and strengthen the data sharing culture and motivate staff to open more data
Clarity on how to share data containing personally sensitive information, and
GDPR test cases will enable more data to be confidently and safely shared.
Successes:
The EA’s  open data risk management checklist helps managers decide if they
can release data under an Open Government License or if a more restrictive
license is necessary
The Shoothill Gauge Map is an example of open data leading to the
development of good quality third-party products
Data sharing is now considered whenever a new dataset is created.
Impact:
Increased trust in Environment Agency activities due to transparency
Increased public engagement and support
Reduction in resources needed to process Freedom of Information requests as
data is published proactively.
Fintech
Share what you can to the extent you can
“
”
I’m concerned you’ll fin d out that we’ve created a a really
nice fin e-grained fle xible consent model which empowers
the individuals and the individuals just won’t care
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/9/18
Challenges:
End-user identity management is currently cumbersome. Users reduce
cognitive load by not engaging with privacy statements and terms, and then
lose trust when something goes wrong
PSD2 doesn’t currently allow regulated organisations to display their consumer
brands, resulting in consumer confusion and lack of trust.
Possible solutions:
A centralised identity system like those in place in Belgium and Scandinavia
(BankID), may enable more informed customer behaviour as the authentication
process becomes less of a chore
PSD2 API extensions for finer control or what data is shared will enable users
to allow access to more services without significantly increasing their exposure
to data breaches
A regulator may be needed to manage the friction in handovers between
financial institutions and other regulated service providers.
Successes:
Detailed regulations and a clear liability model are already in place.
Impact:
Greater competition and innovation leading to better products and services for
consumers
Extractives
Challenges:
The industry has a long history of secrecy both within companies and their
government counterparts
Some governments lack the skills and resources to manage and release the
data that they have access to
Extractive companies are assumed to only release data in their own self-
interest, and data that is released is rarely granular. Larger companies typically
only need to release a small fraction of information they have in order to
Lots of decision makers simply don’t trust information in
public domain because, the industries themselves retain
this culture of secrecy overall
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/10/18
comply with regulation
A global portfolio approach to risk means that windfalls in one location
subsidise failures elsewhere in the world, ensuring that the interests of
extractive companies and the localities they operate in are rarely aligned.
Towards a solution:
Regulation and enforcement
Help and training for government resource regulators
More awareness and use of what is already in the public domain
Support of the trend toward open contract terms
Initiatives to improve the findability of that is already in the public domain.
Successes:
There is some progress on open contracts
Impact:
Open data can help governments better manage their assets and address
climate change
Citizens can fairly evaluate government management of natural resources
Transport & Autonomous Vehicles (AV)
Challenges:
Data sharing is seen as a commercial and legal risk
Lack of established business models. A decision to release data may feel like
a “leap of faith”
Transport users outside London are believed to be resistant to sharing
payment and location data with transport companies.
Possible solutions:
Clear business cases and examples, particularly in the private sector
Clear benefits to transport users of sharing payment, journey, and location data
Policy leadership
Sharing of AV AI edge case data to improve safety while minimising
commercial risk
Services that turn CCTV data into data which is more abstract and less
personally identifiable while still being useful for AI system training
A data commonsstewardedby a non-profitorganisationto ensureeasy
More data, more choice and a more effective alternative to
just driving yourself everywhere
“
”

28/10/2022, 11:11What organisations need in order to share more data: our research – The ODI
https://theodi.org/article/what-organisations-need-in-order-to-share-more-data-our-research/11/18
A data commons stewarded by a nonprofit organisation to ensure easy
access for all.
Successes:
Cashpoint and mobile phone networks demonstrate how data sharing can
enable market growth
Effective sharing within the London transport ecosystem
Uber releasing data for planning purposes.
Impact of increased data sharing:
Joined up public transport leads to fewer car journeys and the resulting
environmental and health benefits
Safe autonomous vehicles
More effective transit options for rural areas whether through more efficient bus
services or shared and/or autonomous vehicles.
Get involved
If you’d like to find out more about our research in this area, or would like to work
with us, please contact research@theodi.org
Related
Recent related activities
BLOG, NEWS 11/10/2022