

 

 
 
 
 
Contents 
About 
Executive summary 
Background 
Approach 
Key insights 
 
Session 1: How data relates to the everyday life of engineers 
Session 2: Identifying the data skills and knowledge needed to improve access, 
use and sharing of data in the engineering sector 
Session 3: How data skills and knowledge needs compare to what support is 
already available 
Summary and next steps 
 
Short term (January – March 2020) – next steps for the ODI 
Longer term (April 2020 onwards) – considerations for funders 
Appendix 1: Workshop attendance 
Appendix 2: Workshop images 
Appendix 3: Summary of ODI desk and user research 
 
Approach 
Key Insights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About 
 
This report was produced as part of a project funded by Lloyd's Register Foundation. 
It builds on research from the Open Data Institute's ​Sharing engineering data for the 
public good​ project funded by Lloyd's Register Foundation. The views in this report 
are those of the authors. 
 
This report has been researched and produced by the Open Data Institute, 
and published in January 2021. Its lead authors were Deborah Yates, James 
Maddison and Mahad Alassow. If you want to share feedback by email or would like 
to get in touch, contact James Maddison at ​james.maddison@theodi.org​.  
 
To share feedback in the comments, highlight the relevant piece of text and click 
the ‘Add a comment’ icon on the right-hand side of the page. 
 
 
 
 
 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     3 
 
How can it be improved? We welcome suggestions 
from the community in the comments. 

 
 
Executive summary 
This report is the result of a half-day discovery workshop facilitated by the Open Data 
Institute (ODI) and commissioned by Lloyd's Register Foundation. The workshop was 
designed to help understand the extent of support, training and guidance for data 
literacy and skills in the engineering sector. This is part of wider work to take forward 
the principle of ‘building data literacy and skills’ set out in the industry backed 
manifesto​ for sharing engineering data for public good. Together with a variety of 
stakeholders (see appendix one) from across the engineering landscape, we 
discussed the role that data plays in the everyday work of engineers; examined the 
balance of data skills needed across engineering organisations; and discussed how 
existing support compares to what is needed, in order to inform interventions to drive 
greater use and sharing of data in the sector. 
 
While it was felt that in some areas of engineering, data skills and knowledge were 
fairly strong, the general consensus from participants was that the level of data skills 
and knowledge across the whole sector needs to be improved, and requires more 
investment.  
 
In this report we make a number of recommendations on next steps to be delivered 
over the short (next six months) and long (beyond six months) term. These are 
provided in detail at the end of the report and include: 
 
1.Producing a white paper on data skills in engineering 
2.Convening a roundtable with engineering CPD providers to explore 
opportunities for adding data skills to existing CPD offerings 
3.Working with universities, research organisations and professional bodies to 
increase capacity in data skills and knowledge 
4.Developing an ‘introduction to data in engineering’ learning programme 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     4 

 
 
Background 
In 2019, the ODI, funded by Lloyd’s Register Foundation, undertook a ​short project 
aimed to develop a movement within the engineering sector that would lead to the 
sharing and use of data for the public good, with a particular focus on improving 
safety. 
 
We engaged with stakeholders – including the Royal Academy of Engineering, the 
Health and Safety Executive, The Alan Turing Institute and Cambridge University 
Press – to develop a shared vision around better use of data. In May 2019 we hosted 
a public event to help to articulate and explore our shared vision, and in October 
2019, we published a ​manifesto​ and ​report​ with Lloyd’s Register Foundation, which 
identifies ways to build a stronger engineering data infrastructure to increase safety 
within the sector. 
 
The ODI and Lloyd's Register Foundation teamed up again in 2020 to take two of the 
manifesto principles forward: 
 
●Using challenges to drive innovation that solves problems ​by launching a 
new stimulus fund to support ​small projects to pilot approaches​ on a 
practical level.  
●Building data literacy and skills.​ Through desk and user research aiming to 
gather evidence and insight into the need for data literacy and existing 
support available in the form of training, certifications or codes of practice.  
 
This workshop forms part of the user research to ensure we focus efforts on adding 
value to sharing data within the sector, and don’t repeat work already done. 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     5 

 
 
Approach 
This half-day discovery workshop, held on 22 October 2020, brought together key 
stakeholders from the engineering sector to share their perspectives on data literacy 
and skills. Participants came from a variety of disciplines, representing research, 
regulation, funders and those that create data. A full list of organisations attending is 
included in ​appendix 1​.  
 
The workshop was split into three sessions: 
 
1.How data relates to the everyday life of engineers 
2.Identifying the data skills and knowledge needed to improve access, use and 
sharing of data in the engineering sector 
3.How data skills and knowledge needs compare to what support is already 
available 
 
We used the ODI ​Data Skills Framework​ to consider the balance of data skills – from 
the more technical to those that enable innovation – needed within organisations. We 
reflected on which elements of the skills framework were a priority to increase 
access, use and sharing of data, and considered the skills most relevant or missing 
for specific disciplines. 
 
Our intention is to use these insights, combined with findings from more focused ​user 
interviews​ carried out by the ODI (included in appendix 3), to determine whether there 
is a need to revise or expand on existing codes of practice, certifications or training, 
and consider new initiatives to promote data understanding and use for the 
engineering sector. 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     6 

 
 
Key insights 
This section brings out the key insights from each session. 
Session 1: How data relates to the everyday life of 
engineers 
In this discussion we reflected on how data relates to the everyday life of engineers, 
considering the value of data to day-to-day work, and the level of awareness of this 
across disciplines. The points below bring out the main themes and insights from the 
discussion. 
 
The value of data day-to-day 
 
●There has been a slow take-up but data is being talked about a lot more, 
especially in the construction sector. 
●There is increasing use of data within Artificial Intelligence (eg as part of 
research), but core skills and knowledge around data are not always 
prioritised.  
●Private sector is often results orientated, so even with limited data it’s 
expected that staff extrapolate. 
●The Covid-19 pandemic has elevated data discussions to board level in many 
cases. 
 
Knowledge  
 
●There is a high variability of skills and knowledge depending on 
discipline/geography. 
●Those in ‘data roles’ tend to have the analytics skills to do their job. 
●In general there is a higher level of comfort discussing ‘headlines’ drawn from 
data, over more detailed analysis. Organisations tend to rely on high level 
datasets and do not understand the potential risks in terms of decision 
making based on these datasets only. It’s an issue which results in 
inaccuracies. 
●The engineering sector is very varied which means people need to work 
together – it’s hard for one person to have all the expertise. Well-balanced 
teams are key to covering the breadth of data topics and practical 
experience, however the approach to skills and knowledge is currently more 
on an individual basis rather than thinking about the team as a whole.  
●Universities are beginning to offer more data literacy courses, but uptake is 
slow. 
●Engineering professionals need help to understand the problem of incorrect 
information.  
●There is growing recognition that the ‘​data translator​’ is vital for organisations 
in making data-informed decisions and creating value from data. Visualization 
and creativity are vital in this​. 
 
Access and use of data  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     7 

 
 
●In general, data is not curated well and this impacts access and use. 
●Different people use different standards which can make it difficult to access 
and use data within engineering. For example, the codes will be different – 
how data is manually inputted makes a difference to how well computers 
communicate and link data. 
●Building Information Modelling (BIM) is an example of best practice in access 
and use of data. 
●Technical infrastructure, and the required understanding of it, are not always 
there to support use of data. 
●Funders are beginning to encourage responsible data use. 
Session 2: Identifying the data skills and 
knowledge needed to improve access, use and 
sharing of data in the engineering sector 
In this session we used the ODI ​Data Skills Framework​ to consider the balance of 
data skills needed within organisations – from the more technical to those that enable 
innovation. We reflected on which elements of the skills framework were a priority to 
increase access, use and sharing of data, and considered which skills were most 
relevant and which were missing for specific disciplines. Images from this interactive 
session are included in ​appendix 2​ and we have summarised the main points below. 
 
Innovating with data 
 
●Working in an ethical manner is a top priority and shouldn’t be neglected in 
favour of other goals. 
●There is a lack of knowledge about the data capabilities people hold. 
Promoting and developing the awareness of data capabilities could help 
reduce current inefficiencies. 
●Skills to apply statistics, use data, analyse trends and draw insights are 
important to enable organisations to relate to, and achieve value from, data. 
 
Standardising and accessing data 
 
●Standardising data can be difficult, particularly when innovation is rapid.  
●A uniform way of working to standardise data across the sector would help 
different systems to communicate. 
●Developing an industry wide and accepted practice to manage and store 
data will improve and encourage collaborations. 
●Improving skills to describe and inventory data will help people to find and 
access it more easily. 
●Open platforms like Github, where people around the world start working on 
the code and build on the data, are important for working across countries 
and maximising access, use and sharing of data. 
 
Leading change 
 
●“Having a go-to person has been a game changer. Before it was difficult to 
know who had the responsibility [for the data]” 
●It is important for those not in technical roles to have at least a baseline level 
of understanding of data and its value to a project, to foster an environment 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     8 

 
 
where sharing learning – both positive and negative – about data projects is 
encouraged.  
●User engagement capabilities are important to encourage adoption of data 
that is shared. For example, using journey maps outlining real sectoral 
challenges – if a user can directly see how their practical challenges can be 
addressed using data, the buy-in rate improves. 
Session 3: How data skills and knowledge needs 
compare to what support is already available 
In this discussion, we reflected on how data literacy needs compare to what support 
is already available. We shared ODI desk and user research on this topic (a full 
summary is included in ​appendix 3​), and discussed whether the findings reflected the 
experiences of the participants.  
 
Gaps in support for data skills and knowledge 
 
●Practical guidance on working in an ethical manner when sharing and using 
data.  
●Peer learning approaches. For example, across supply chains, for those 
working on digital twins, or via implementation of the UK National Data 
Strategy. 
●Sharing where things went wrong, as well as where things went well – 
balancing sharing the learning with managing reputation is often a challenge. 
●Data literacy for those not in formal ‘data roles’ – often there is a big gap in 
knowledge here. 
●Cultural change – people and organisations often go on a journey to become 
comfortable sharing data, particularly if they are worried about reputation or 
competitive advantage. There isn’t much available to support this process. 
●Curating, documenting and inventorying data – it can be hard to find what’s 
needed and then access it. There is a need for help to structure what already 
exists. For example, data about building stock and construction. 
●Clarity on roles and governance of key national data assets such as building 
stock (eg currently this is being collated by the Colouring Cities project). 
 
There was broad agreement that no one organisation is in an obvious place to drive 
change and lead skills development, and that it should be a private/public 
partnership. 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     9 

 
 
Summary and next steps 
This half-day workshop generated some useful insights into the levels of data literacy 
and skills required to access, use and share data in engineering. The group was 
enthusiastic and engaged throughout and each participant had the opportunity to 
input and be heard. Workshop participants agreed there is value in bringing 
cross-discipline groups like this together as they all learnt something from each other. 
 
There are some clear areas to consider in terms of next steps. Taking into account 
what we heard during the workshop, and building on our earlier work with Lloyd's 
Register Foundation, we have identified some short-term activities for the ODI to 
undertake as part of our ongoing project with Lloyd's Register Foundation. We have 
also identified potential future activities that would require additional funding. 
Together, these should begin to increase data literacy and skills to support increased 
access, use and sharing in the engineering sector.  
Short term (January – March 2020) – next steps 
for the ODI 
This set of short-term activities will be delivered by the ODI under our existing grant 
from Lloyd's Register Foundation.  
 
1.Produce a white paper on data skills in engineering. ​This joint paper will 
be a collaboration between Lloyd's Register Foundation, ODI and industry 
leaders such as the Alan Turing Institute and the Royal Academy of 
Engineering. The paper will consider the skills and any specific types of 
training needed to implement the principles set out in the ​manifesto​ to 
increase access to data and drive innovation in the engineering sector. 
 
2.Convene a roundtable to explore opportunities for adding data skills to 
existing CPD offerings. ​Engaging universities and engineering organisations 
which provide education services to explore the value of working together to 
include data skills and literacy in their training programme. This would include 
data, digital and education staff from continuing professional development 
(CPD) providers and support the longer term aim of sector change. 
Longer term (April 2020 onwards) – 
considerations for funders  
These activities could help to improve data skills and knowledge across the sector. 
Funders are asked to consider: 
 
1.Work with universities, research organisations and professional bodies 
to increase capacity in data skills and knowledge. ​Develop a programme 
of training that would enable universities to communicate, teach and engage 
students in the practical application of data within specific disciplines of 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     10 

 
 
engineering, and add any new courses or content focused in this area to their 
existing CPD offering. 
 
2.Develop an ‘introduction to data in engineering’ learning programme. 
Building on feedback from the ODI’s trial of learning programmes (above), 
this piece of work would engage and align with existing initiatives, such as 
Engineering X​ and ​Data-Centric Engineering​ to improve data literacy for 
those not in formal ‘data roles’.  
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     11 

 
 
Appendix 1: Workshop 
attendance 
 
The workshop included nine participants from nine organisations: 
 
 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     12 
Organisation Organisation role Attendee Role 
Health & Safety Executive Regulator Senior Scientist 
Colouring London/Alan Turing 
Institute 
Researcher Programme Director 
EPSRC Funder Senior Portfolio Manager 
Geodata Creator Enterprise Fellow 
Atkins Steward/Creator Data Scientist 
Mission Drive/ODI Data skills consultant Data Skills Consultant 
Lloyd's Register Foundation Funder Programme Manager 
RAENG – Engineering X Researcher Senior Manager 
Tideway Steward Engineering Information Manager  

 
 
Appendix 2: Workshop 
images 
In this appendix we share screenshots of the ‘Jamboard’ activity used in session 2, 
asking participants to consider what skills are required to improve access, use and 
sharing of data in engineering. We used the ODI’s ​Data Skills Framework ​to help 
structure our thoughts around the common skills and capabilities required to create 
value from data. 
 
  
 
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     13 

 
 
Appendix 3: Summary of 
ODI desk and user 
research 
Approach  
The ODI conducted research using a combined approach: desk research, followed by 
a number of expert interviews. Insights from both elements informed the structure 
and focus of the workshop. 
 
The desk research focused on two key questions: 
 
●What codes of practice or guidance are available to organisations in the 
engineering space around accessing, using and sharing data?  
●What training courses or certification are available to organisations in the 
engineering space around accessing, using and sharing data?  
 
The desk research uncovered a number of gaps which were used to create more 
specific questions for seven expert interviews, with a focus on current best practice 
and existing gaps, in guidance, training and skills. We engaged with a range of 
stakeholders, in different roles, from organisations working in the sector. 
Stakeholders were selected based on their experience working on or with data 
enabled projects, and to cover a range of typical roles within the engineering 
ecosystem. 
 
 
  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     14 
Organisation Organisation role 
Health & Safety Executive (x2)  Regulator 
Arup  Advisor 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Funder 
Royal Academy of Engineering Researcher 
Tideway Steward 
Centre for Digital Built Britain Decision maker  

 
 
Key Insights 
There is not much generic guidance or training around data in the engineering sector. 
Most organisations follow the rules outlined in GDPR, and may have their internal 
guidelines to follow around accessing, using and sharing data as well. Some 
organisations have their own training programmes around data, but it’s not always 
mandatory to attend them. There are a small number of organisations which offer 
external guidance, like Royal Academy of Engineering’s ‘Towards Trusted Data 
Sharing’ work, but these are rare.  
 
Data guidance needs to be embedded into everyday engineering practices, and 
people working in the sector need to be able to see the value of data for their role, 
and for their organisation, in order for it to make sense to them. If organisations are to 
invest in upskilling staff in data knowledge and skills, that upskilling needs to be 
aimed at addressing specific business or organisational problems or opportunities. 
Practical guidance around accessing, using and sharing data for the engineering 
sector, guidance about the value of data and case studies would be really useful 
here. 
 
There are some more general problems to be solved as well. Often, data isn’t 
something that is well understood across the organisation, from top to bottom, which 
means that culture change around data and digital is driven by a few individuals, 
usually from the bottom up. There is sometimes a disconnect in understanding 
between departments or roles, which can cause miscommunication and a 
misinterpretation of each other's needs. Guidance around the fundamentals of data, 
such as key terms and concepts would be useful for bringing people across 
organisations onto the same page. Similarly, examples of how other sectors are 
demonstrating value with data, as well as tools that organisations can use to have 
conversations about data would be valuable.  
Open Data Institute 2021Workshop Report - data skills & knowledge in the engineering sector     15 