

Open Banking
Consumer consent frameworks 
around the globe

ContentsIntroduction
About Equifax and The ODI
This report was written by the Open Data Institute (ODI) for Equifax Ltd.
Founded in 2012, the ODI is an international, independent and not-for-
profit organisation based in London, UK. The ODI works with companies and 
governments to build an open, trustworthy data ecosystem, where people can 
make better decisions using data and manage any harmful impacts.
1
Equifax is a global information solutions company that uses unique data, 
innovative analytics, technology and industry expertise to power organisations and 
individuals around the world by transforming knowledge into insights that help 
make more informed business and personal decisions. Headquartered in Atlanta, 
Ga., Equifax operates or has investments in 24 countries in North America, Central 
and South America, Europe and the Asia Pacific region. It is a member of Standard 
& Poor’s (S&P) 500® Index, and its common stock is traded on the New York Stock 
Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol EFX.
2
What is Consent?
The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) defines consent as “any freely given, 
specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wishes 
by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies 
agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her”.  Across the 
banking and financial sectors, this generally refers to a customer allowing a third 
party service provider access to data about them that is held by their bank or 
other financial institution.
Consent is one of the core aspects underpinning the trusted data sharing system 
known as Open Banking. 
Open Banking allows retail banking customers to share account and transaction 
data with trusted partners. This shared data is combined with openly published 
non-personal data, such as lists of bank products and branch locations, to build 
useful services for customers, FinTechs, and banks themselves.
1
 Open Data Institute (2012), ‘The Open Data Institute’, theodi.org
2
 Equifax (2019), ‘Company Profile’, https://www.equifax.com/about-equifax/company-profile
1
Research carried out by the Open Data Institute for Equifax
Introduction                                                                                                                                                                1
About Equifax and The ODI 1
What is Consent? 1
Executive Summary 2
Research Methodology 4
Research Results 6
Specific Open Banking regulations 6
How consumers give consent 8
Revoking consent 11
Rules and restrictions regarding consumer consent 12
Rules and restrictions regarding data use 13
Duration of consent 15
The consequences of breaking the rules 16
Conclusion                                                                                                                                                                   18
Appendix                                                                                                                                                                      19
Contributors 19
Interview questions 20
Other documents 20

Executive summary
Consent is an invaluable aspect of a trustworthy and effective data ecosystem. Consent mechanisms can vary 
substantially from country to country. This happens for a variety of reasons, such as the type of organisation governing 
consent, the social and legal context, the risks to individuals or different groups of people, or the technical landscape. 
Language can also impact how consent is treated, both in terms of different languages being interpreted differently 
across borders, but even within the same language. In English alone, terms such as “consent”, “authorisation”, and 
sometimes even “authentication” can be used interchangeably, further frustrating comparison.
Despite this, there are overarching similarities that can be discussed and compared across the boundaries set by 
governments and regulators, how consent is granted by consumers, how it is revoked, how long consent lasts, and the 
punishment for breaking the rules. Universally important aspects are that consent must be clear to customers, using 
language like ‘informed’, ‘explicit’, ‘affirmative’. Most regimes also emphasise that consent must be ‘free’ or ‘voluntary’, 
and as easy to revoke as it is to give.
The specific rules of how consent operates, such as duration, restrictions, and punishments are far less universal. 
Across our research we observed the time period for consent to range from 90 days in Europe, to one year in 
Australia and New Zealand, with most countries not defining this crucial aspect at all. Restrictions tend to be informed 
by the privacy laws of the different countries, which like consent can be very idiosyncratic across cultures and legal 
landscapes. The UK and Australia have built whitelists for their Open Banking regimes to control which organisations 
can participate, while Mexico and New Zealand have been less restrictive in this. Punishments can range both within 
and across countries depending on the severity of the infraction. 
Open Banking regimes often offer a dispute resolution mechanism to allow organisations to 
work out solutions together
. 
Where the laws around consent have been broken, countries such as Japan and Mexico have been very explicit about 
repercussions in the form of hundreds of thousands of dollars in fines and years of prison time.
The UK and Europe have been leaders in this space in recent years with the implementation of legislation across 
the continent such as PSD2 and GDPR, and many countries look to them to understand what works well and what 
doesn’t. Australia and New Zealand especially have been making progress, particularly leveraging the UK Open Banking 
Standard to inform consent due to cultural and economic similarities. Countries with dissimilar banking industries such 
as Mexico and Nigeria have also been pushing ahead with their own consent regimes via Open Banking initiatives, but 
taking a more regionally appropriate approach.
Creating an easy, open way to compare consent could be useful to the international banking community in many ways:
•  Different initiatives around the world could learn from each other, share resources on best practises, and coordinate  
   on implementation.
•  Comparison and coordination could help with interoperability in financial services between countries, potentially   
   boosting trade and giving customers more and better options.
•  More public awareness and understanding of consent could increase public confidence in these new processes, and  
   reduce potential misconceptions around concepts like “Open Banking”.
•  More public confidence could support user adoption, increasing the number of people with access to the benefits of  
   Open Banking.
•  Getting consent right in the banking sector and creating a trustworthy data ecosystem could create a demand for 
  the same rigour in other sectors, and open up dialogue about consent and personal data across society in       
  meaningful and informed ways.

Research methodology
Research carried out by the Open Data Institute on behalf of Equifax in Autumn 2019. The research methodology for 
this paper employed both desk research and user research. Desk research was completed by analysing Open Banking 
and banking data portability initiatives, as well as data protection legislation from the following countries: 
User research was conducted by interviewing regional experts in Open Banking and banking data portability across 
Australia, Canada, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain and the UK. The full list of contributors and research 
questions are available in the appendix.
54
Australia
Open Banking Initiative: Consumer Right Data (CDR)
Key laws governing consent: CDR
Relevant organisations: Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission (ACCC)
European Union (EU)
Open Banking Initiative: 
Second Payment Services 
Directive (PSD2)
Key laws governing consent: 
General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR)
Relevant organisations: 
Directorate-General for 
Financial Stability, Financial 
Services and Capital Markets 
Union (DG FISMA) and 
European Commission (EC)
India
Open Banking Initiative: 
Unified Payment Interface 
(UPI) / Aadhar
Key laws governing 
consent: Personal Data 
Protection Bill [DRAFT]
Relevant organisations: 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Malaysia
Open Banking Initiative: 
Policy Document on 
Publishing Open Data 
using Open API 
Key laws governing 
consent: Personal Data 
Protection Act 2010
Relevant organisations: 
Bank Negara Malaysia
New Zealand
Open Banking Initiative: Payments NZ API Standards
Key laws governing consent: Payments NZ API 
Standards - Consent Management API
Relevant organisations: Payments NZ
Nigeria
Open Banking Initiative: Open 
Banking Nigeria (in progress)
Key laws governing consent: 
Open Vector report for OBN 
Relevant organisations: Open 
Technology Foundation (OTF) 
and Open Banking Nigeria 
(OBN)
UK 
Open Banking Initiative: Open 
Banking
Key laws governing consent: 
GDPR and Data Protection 
Act 2018
Relevant organisations: Open 
Banking Limited,  Competition 
and Markets Authority 
(CMA), and Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA)
Spain
Open Banking Initiative: PSD2
Key laws governing consent: 
GDPR
Relevant organisations: DG 
FISMA and EC
Japan
Open Banking Initiative: Banking Act amendments 
for ‘Electronic Payment Intermediate Service 
Providers’
Key laws governing consent: Act on the Protection 
of Personal Information
Relevant organisations: Financial Services Agency 
(FSA) and Japanese Bankers Association (JBA)
Brazil
Open Banking Initiative: N/A
Key laws governing consent: General Data 
Protection Law (GDPL)
Relevant organisations: National Data 
Protection Authority
Canada
Open Banking 
Initiative: N/A - Review 
into the Merits of Open 
Banking
Key laws governing 
consent: Personal 
Information Protection 
and Electronic 
Documents Act (PIPEDA)
Relevant organisations: 
Payments Canada and 
Bank of Canada
Mexico
Open Banking Initiative: Law Regulating 
the Financial Technology Institutions (“The 
FinTech Law”)
Key laws governing consent: Federal Law 
on Protection of Personal Data Held by 
Private Parties 
Relevant organisations: Comisión 
Nacional Bancaria y de Valores (CNBV) and 
Open Banking Mexico
USA 
Open Banking Initiative: 
N/A
Key laws governing 
consent: Dodd-Frank 
Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act 
Relevant organisations: 
National Automated 
Clearinghouse Association 
(NACHA) and Consumer 
Financial Protection 
Bureau (CFPB)
Hong Kong
Open Banking Initiative: Open Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) for Banking
Key laws governing consent: Guidance on the Proper 
Handling of Customers’ Personal Data for the Banking 
Industry / The Personal Data Ordinance
Relevant organisations: Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority (HKMA) and Privacy Commissioner

6
Specific Open Banking regulations
Whether or not countries have “Open Banking” regulations may be a matter of vocabulary and definition. Open Banking 
is the term used for the functionality including and beyond PSD2 in the UK, and it is likely that it may take on different 
forms in different markets. This could also include the use of open Application Program Interfaces (APIs) - APIs that give 
public availability to web services, the publishing of open data - data that anyone can access, use and share, and more. 
The UK initially designed this initiative to increase competition in the retail banking sector by encouraging innovative 
solutions powered through data sharing. 
Outside of the UK in Europe, PSD2 looms large as the regional regulatory regime. Though this is not always considered 
an Open Banking initiative, it embodies much of the same characteristics. PSD2 regulates payment services and 
payment service providers, and works alongside the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) to ensure the harmonisation 
of payment products, infrastructures and technical standards across Europe. The scheduled introduction of Strong 
Customer Authentication (SCA) and Common and Secure Communication (CSC) in September bring new advances to 
this regulation.
Australia
Australia has adapted the structure of Open Banking in the UK as part of the implementation of the 
Consumer Data Right (CDR). This will require a similar rules around secure APIs featured in the UK’s Open 
Banking, but for all CDR data. The difference in this is that the Consumer Data Right only begins with banking 
data. The end game is to roll out a similar API-based data portability regime for personal data in other sectors 
as well, such as energy and telecommunications.
Mexico
Mexico plans to enforce many of the same aspects as the UK, such as APIs and the sharing of open, 
aggregated and transactional data by financial services providers. However Mexico is taking an industry-led 
route that is focussing on innovative products for consumers over increased competition as its goal. It will 
also be allowing for premium APIs, APIs providing functionality which can be charged for by the financial 
institutes providing them, and will impose Open Banking on all financial institutions, not just the major ones.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong published their Open API Framework for the Hong Kong banking sector in 2018, setting out its 
intended approach to Open Banking. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) has also allowed industry 
to set its own standards without making it a regulatory requirement and the first API for product information 
was rolled out in early 2019.
India
India’s Open Banking is built in part on the authentication process in Aadhar, the country’s national identity 
platform. India’s Unified Payment Interface (UPI) enables all bank account holders in the country to send 
and receive money from their smartphones without the need to enter bank account information or 
online banking details. As of March 2019, UPI is used by 142 banks, accounting for just under 800 million 
transactions a month with a combined value of US$19 billion.
New Zealand
New Zealand is developing its Open Banking framework by adapting 
much of the UK standard. This is being driven by the voluntary 
cooperation of the major players in the market under the stewardship 
of the local payments association, PaymentsNZ. Similar to the UK, New 
Zealand’s pilot includes account information and payments, and will be 
executed under the guidance of its own Open Banking working group. 
Unlike the UK, which rolled out account information functionality 
before payments, PaymentsNZ plans to launch both up front, putting a 
higher onus on having the proper consent model in place.
Japan
In 2017, Japan passed the Amended Banking Act to introduce a 
registration system for Third Party Service Providers (TPPs) and set 
the framework for collaboration between banks and TPPs. The act 
encouraged banks to open their APIs by 2020, with 100 financial 
institutions using these APIs by the Olympics being an important 
national goal. There have also been voluntary partnerships between 
financial institutions to launch digital payment initiatives. However, 
adoption by third parties has been low, in part because of the difficulty 
banks and FinTechs have in negotiating contracts.
Canada
Canada created an Advisory Committee on Open Banking to review 
potential benefits of Open Banking. In June 2019, the Standing Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce released its report 
entitled “Open Banking: What It Means For You”, which included a 
number of recommendations intended to lay the groundwork for the 
rollout of Open Banking in Canada.
Nigeria
Open Banking Nigeria (OBN) was launched in 2018 in a bid to drive 
innovation and choice in the Nigerian banking sector. Its objective is to 
roll out open APIs and encourage banks and FinTechs to adopt open 
standards for API implementation. Nigeria is creating a framework and 
they hope to draft their own standard that will be more appropriate 
for Nigeria and other countries in West Africa. OBN believes Open 
Banking will revolutionise the Nigerian banking sector and be a huge 
boost to the economy as a whole.
7

8
How consumers give consent
Australia
Redirect model
New Zealand 
Redirect model - 
must be explicit 
and informed 
Canada
Consent principle 
states that it requires 
a reasonable 
effort to ensure 
purpose
EU
Must be explicit, 
freely given, specific, 
informed and 
unambiguously
Hong Kong
Consent must be 
express and 
voluntary
India
Must be 
explicit
Japan
Unspecified - must 
strive to avoid 
misunderstandings or 
misperceptions
Malaysia
Required for 
personal data but only 
explicit consent’ for 
sensitive personal 
data
Nigeria
Give informed 
consent
UK
Redirect model - 
must be explicit and 
informed 
USA
Treasury 
recommends informed 
consent for data 
accessed via screen 
scraping
Mexico
Unspecified
Brazil
Must be free, 
informed and 
unambiguous 
and for a given 
purpose
“[In Nigeria], Consumers give informed consent when they are able to see the 
type of data they will allow access to, how often or long the TPP would have 
access, and are able to successfully authenticate against their bank’s system.”
“In New Zealand, both API Providers (ASPSPs) and Third Parties 
(TPPs) are subject to the Privacy Act, which sets out how they 
must collect, use and store personal information. Accordingly, 
consent obligations sit with both the APSPs and the TPPs.”
As noted earlier, consent mechanisms can vary substantially from country to 
country, though there are some commonalities across them. In numerous consent 
environments, we see three key elements: consent being explicit, voluntary, and 
not cumbersome. These three elements increase the likelihood of people being 
properly informed when consenting their data, as it adds enough friction in the 
process to allow awareness, without overburdening someone with terms and 
conditions.
One form of consent we see in countries that already have an Open Banking 
infrastructure, is the “redirect model”. In the UK this means that customers 
give their consent to a Third Party Service Provider (TPP), but authenticate their 
consent with their bank, allowing the customer to keep the identity credentials 
that are used with their bank private. This model allows for a clear and simple way 
for customers to provide consent to TPPs. It also exists across the EU via PSD2, 
which has its data protection foundation within GDPR. Meanwhile Australia, New 
Zealand and Nigeria are rolling out consent in a similar fashion in their Open 
Banking initiatives as well. 
Redirect models defined by Open Banking initiatives are not the only way to give 
consent. 
Other Open Banking initiatives use the consent models that are defined in data 
protection laws that safeguard the rights of consumers around the collection, 
use, and sharing of their data. Hong Kong’s Open APIs are governed by its data 
protection laws requiring ‘express’ and ‘voluntary’ written consent. India uses 
RBI’s ‘master directions’ while its data protection is still in draft, which have similar 
requirements. Other countries with similar practices include Brazil and Canada.
Some consent regimes are less well-defined than others. For example Japan focuses 
more on ensuring there is a fair process than defining what that process might 
be. Key organisations in the US such as the Treasury and the CFPB recommend 
informed consent for data accessed via screen scraping, but have not defined 
enforceable rules.
Mexico is currently in the process of implementing Open Banking, and though it 
plans to have explicit consent built into the model, the mechanisms to do so have 
not yet been specified via the FinTech Law. 
In Malaysia, like many other countries, there are distinctions between personal data 
and sensitive personal data. Financial data is classified as personal data which only 
requires consent, unlike sensitive personal data which requires explicit content. 
Adédèjì Olówè, Trustee,
Open Banking Nigeria
Steve Wiggins, Chief Executive,
PaymentsNZ
9

UK Open Banking and Consent
by Emma Steeley, CEO, AccountScore
UK banking consumers for the first time have transparency, awareness and control over their data. The sharing of the 
data ensures that the customer is well informed of what data is being accessed, by whom and on what terms, including 
the frequency of access. 
User experience has improved over a period of time and we have seen a significant increase in the completion rates of 
consumers sharing their data throughout the year, especially with the launch of Open Banking’s Customer Experience 
Guidelines V3.1 with app-to-app redirection. 
Open Banking stipulates that explicit consent is required in order to facilitate the sharing of bank transaction data.
The positives:
•  Allows the customer to be in control of what data they share and when
•  Provides the ability for a customer to revoke consent at any time
•  Means organisations need to articulate clearly what data they are sharing and be clear about why  
•  Creates a method by which companies and government organisations can work within data protection regulation 
The negatives:
•  Organisations which have broken down silos now face restrictions on how they can use data
•  Consent management by definition requires a user interface for customers which may not be consistent with an   
  organisation’s UI strategy or brand values
•  Organisations may end up with multiple APIs to manage consent which could be confusing
•  The entire consent model could make customers wary of sharing data where it is in their best interest
Consent Management
The complexity for consumers comes into play when they are able to manage their consents. With the increasing 
volumes of TPPs, that are now implementing a consent management platform in order to adhere to the Open Banking 
Customer Experience Guidelines, the consumer may have multiple data shares through multiple organisations, which 
may quickly become confusing.
AccountScore believes that consumers wish to organise similar activities into single places in their digital lives.
In its simplest form, consent management requires: 
•  A list of data assets a consumer possesses;
•  A list of organisations they share them with; and 
•  A graphical representation of the interactions which exist between them
Global Consent
Being the first Open Banking implementation to go live across the globe has given the UK a distinct advantage. 
However, AccountScore believes that global consent is something that is not going away and that ultimately consumers 
will want a single app where they can see and amend these interactions across all organisations, thus creating an easy 
to manage consent data vault.
Revoking consent
Just as important as the process to provide consent, the ability to revoke consent is a 
key component of Open Banking. Open Banking in the UK and PSD2 have spearheaded 
the importance of allowing customers to withdraw consent at any time. The mechanism 
for this is through a permissions dashboard which can be accessed by the consumer 
through their bank, or increasingly at the TPP. 
Although there are still improvements ongoing regarding consents within Open 
Banking and PSD2, they are still widely looked to internationally, with other consent 
regimes following a similar model. New Zealand and Canada follow the PSD2 model of 
going through the customer’s Account Servicing Payment Service Provider (ASPSP) or 
financial institution directly to revoke consent. Australia has taken a slightly different 
approach by having the TPP be the gatekeeper of revoking consent.
Other data landscapes are less specific around which organisation consent revocation 
should go through, just that it should occur. Countries like Hong Kong, India, Japan, 
Brazil and Malaysia all have clearly written rules allowing for consent to be revoked, 
with Brazil and Hong Kong going as far as to stipulate it can be at any time.
Mexico and Nigeria are yet to complete designing Open Banking, but plan on having 
consent revocation at the forefront of their policies. The screen scraping regime of the 
United States is unclear but the CFPB’s Principles recommend the terms of data access 
disclosed include “access frequency, data scope, and retention period.”  
“[In Mexico], mechanisms are not defined yet but the standard 
specifications and rules will be developed for consent revocation.”
Mariana Velázquez Suárez, Expert,  
Mexico Open Banking
“According to the new data privacy law [in Nigeria], customers can 
revoke consent but the ways and means to do that are not well defined.”
Adédèjì Olówè, Trustee,
Open Banking Nigeria
“In New Zealand a customer can revoke their consent in their 
authenticated environment at the API Provider (ASPSP). The ASPSP 
does not have to push a notification of the revoked consent to the 
Third Party (TPP). However, we have developed easy tools for TPPs 
to review all consents held.”
Steve Wiggins, Chief Executive,
PaymentsNZ
1110

Rules and restrictions regarding 
consumer consent
Rules and restrictions 
regarding data use
Some data sharing regimes also have specific rules around with whom data can be shared. In the UK, a TPP whitelist 
is used to restrict the API framework to organisations that are trusted. This whitelist, now known as the Open Banking 
Directory, was built so that the CMA9 and other banks could identify the TPP seeking to access its APIs and confirm 
that the TPP has the appropriate regulatory permissions. This vetting process ensures a higher level of security, and 
therefore trust in the overall infrastructure which could help promote greater innovation.
Similarly processes are happening in other countries as well. Australia is following the model of the UK in requiring 
that all third parties participating in CDR-powered services be accredited. Mexico will require service providers to be 
authorised by the relevant Supervisory Commission, under specific requirements laid out by the CNBV. The National 
Banking and Securities Commission (CNBV), is a decentralized body of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), 
with powers regarding authorisation, regulation, supervision and sanction on the various sectors and entities that make 
up the financial system in Mexico. Nigeria too will require its Payment Solutions Services Providers (PSSPs) to connect 
with banks through a verification process.
Whitelisting is also one of the places where PSD2 and Open Banking differ. Although PSD2 plans to offer strong 
customer authentication (SCA), alongside other security features, they will not have a list of authorised parties. In 
addition to the EU, New Zealand and Canada do not have any specific rules around who consumers can consent to 
sharing banking data with, and Japan is only limited by its Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL).
One specific rule around acquiring consent that has appeared in a couple regulations has been “bundled consent”. 
Hong Kong’s personal data law labels this as “where a data user collects personal data from a customer through a 
service application form which is designed in such a way that renders it impracticable for the customer to refuse 
consent to the use of his personal data for purposes unrelated to the services to be provided to the customer.” Both 
Australia and Hong Kong specifically deny this type of consent.
Across countries rules also exist around the purposes for which shared data can 
be used. This could vary from restrictions on what purposes that data can be 
shared for, to merely requiring a purpose be clearly stated, to none at all. 
In data sharing programmes such as Open Banking, PSD2, and others, the only 
explicit restriction on types of activity for which banking data can be shared 
are related to other criminal laws, such as financing terrorism or for money 
laundering. 
Under most consent rules, data is consented to be shared for specific purposes 
that are explicitly stated, using shared data for any purpose not stated is breaking 
the agreed rules.  Japan’s data protection law restricts the use of data in this 
way, as does Canada’s privacy laws. Canada includes restricting banks from even 
sharing financial data with their subsidiary companies, such as an insurance 
company. Mexico’s FinTech Law similarly allows only for data to be used for the 
authorised purpose of the customer, as does Brazil.
Australia takes a different approach and imbues the need to state the purpose 
as part of the accreditation process to become a trusted TPP. This is then verified 
with unambiguous disclosure of how the data will be used again at the consent 
stage.
Across India, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Nigeria, New Zealand and the US, specific rules 
for Open Banking have not been created, instead, general legislative frameworks 
for individual countries apply.
“With the implementation of Open Banking in Mexico, in order for a third 
party to be able to connect to the regulatory APIs to access customer 
data, they require prior customer consent. The third party will have to be 
authorized by the relevant Supervisory Commission and will have to meet 
specific requirements in order to be authorized. At the CNBV the secondary 
regulation is under development.” 
“In the Fintech Law of Mexico, article 76, says that the transactional 
data will only be used for the specific purposes authorized by the 
customer and data will be treated as personal data which falls under 
the scope of the privacy law. The secondary regulation is still under 
development and it is being considered the scope of the use of data.” 
Mariana Velázquez Suárez, Expert,  
Mexico Open Banking
Mariana Velázquez Suárez, Expert,  
Mexico Open Banking
1312

EU 90 days
UK 90 days
Australia 12 months
New Zealand 12 months
 
Consent in Open Banking UK 
by Miles Cheetham, Head of Propositions, Open Banking Implementation Entity
There is no question that consumer consent is an area that requires greater clarity and definition as data sharing 
ecosystems develop. It’s crucial for building trust with consumers, but the lack of consistency in which consent is 
explained and obtained can cause consumer confusion. There are a number of dimensions to this.
The respective definitions of consent and explicit consent under GDPR and PSD2 are critical.  How and when this needs 
to be presented to the consumer and how the differences between these two regulations can be made clear continues 
to challenge many.
Where possible, our emerging view is that the account information services provider (AISP) – a type of third party 
provider (TPP) - should consider what legislation or policies the consent requirement is coming from. Once this is 
determined, the AISP can capture this in their Terms and Conditions or elsewhere in launching their service. This should 
also cover aspects such as sharing data with other parties where it is required to create the end “product”. 
This then allows other consent requirements to be presented as a separate request.  As AISPs need to comply with 
consent arrangements provided for under PSD2 and a lawful basis under GDPR, the consumer needs to know exactly 
what they are agreeing to and under what terms. It is our emerging view this can be made very clear and might 
address:
•  The purpose for sharing their personal data
•  The value exchange – what the consumer will get in return for sharing
•  The actual data, which the Open Banking Implementation Entity has defined as a set of data clusters
•  The parameters under which it is being shared i.e. when it starts, for how long, the frequency of access being     
  granted to the AISP and what rights are triggered - and when - in respect of that personal data
Building a clear, well-understood consent system with a good customer journey is essential 
to the success of the Open Banking ecosystem. 
This will allow both banks and AISPs to be confident that they are meeting their regulatory requirements. Most 
importantly, we consider that this is an area which is essential to get right in order to establish trust with the consumer 
and therefore provide a key building block in a healthy data sharing economy.
From the consumer’s perspective we can summarise the key aspects that are important:
•  Setting up a new service should not only be simple, but the key terms and the use of their personal data must be   
  clear. This is where GDPR comes to the fore
•  Granting consent to share personal data under Open Banking must make it very clear why it’s needed, what’s being  
  shared, for how long etc. - and what the consumer will get for doing this. This is where PSD2 is the regulatory driver
  The management and revocation of consent and its distinct implications from a PSD2 or GDPR perspective must be  
  understood by all players, as well as the end consumer. Importantly, a bank or TPP should easily be able to 
  recognise under what legislation the right arises as well as the implications of an end consumer exercising that right 
  under each legislation. At this stage, both PSD2 and GDPR must be addressed 
A great deal to consider. If we can collectively get these dimensions right then we’ll be laying down the right foundation 
for the success of not just Open Banking but the wider data sharing economy that is developing. 
Duration of consent
The duration of consent refers to the length of time a consumer consents to share 
data with a third party. It is the length of time for which that consent is valid and in 
which the third party can use the data.
As of this publication, only the UK, EU, Australia and New Zealand have defined 
consent durations for their Open Banking initiatives. The UK and EU follow the 90 
day guidelines set under PSD2, while Australia and New Zealand have decided to 
set a 12 month consent period.
Brazil Undefined
Canada Undefined
Hong Kong Undefined
India Undefined
Japan Undefined
Malaysia Undefined
Mexico Undefined
Nigeria Undefined
USA Undefined
Country Time Period
Country Time Period
1514

The consequences of breaking 
the rules
With rules and regulations around accreditation and authorisation of third party service providers, there needs to be 
consequences for breaking the rules. Dispute mechanisms can also be created to help mediate conflicts, but penalties 
exist to encourage good behaviour. These penalties can range from organisations being suspended from the data 
sharing system, to having their banking licenses revoked, to fines and potential prison time. 
Open Banking in the UK and PSD2 build on previous legislation in complaint resolution by increasing customer rights 
in the area of complaints handling. PSD2 requires payment providers to respond to and resolve complaints in a timely 
and appropriate manner. For example, payment providers must respond to complaints about customers being out of 
funds within 15 days. 
In the UK the CMA required a customer redress mechanism to manage consumer complaints to ensure that complaints 
are appropriately dealt with between the bank and the TPP. While the regulations set out liability rules, which are 
particularly important in the case of a disputed payment, Open Banking is developing a Dispute Management System 
which enables multiple third parties to resolve disputes between themselves, speeding up resolution.
Most data protection regimes give the data subject the ability to raise complaints for breaking the rules around data 
sharing use. From this there are provisions for investigations into the claims, as well as the possibility for dispute 
resolution and arbitration. Depending on the outcome of the investigation and the severity of the breach there are 
different responses. Interestingly, in Canada it is explicitly stated that the findings of the investigation can be published.
In Mexico the FinTech Law grants Supervisory Commissions to suspend data exchange totally or partially, as well as 
temporarily or definitively. New Zealand similarly has the ability to terminate offenders from the API Centre and remove 
their APIs. Australia can revoke accreditation from the ACCC and the Central Bank of Nigeria can revoke a banking 
license. 
Nigeria, Japan, Canada, New Zealand and Mexico all have stated criminal punishments for severe breaches of the 
regulations. Mexico’s FinTech Law specifically states that fines can be anywhere 5,000 and 150,000 Mexican pesos, and 
between three to nine years in prison.
“In New Zealand, our framework requires organisations to register as an API Provider 
(ASPSPs) or Third Party (TPPs) and sign up to the API Centre’s Terms and Conditions 
in order to use the API Standards. One of these terms relates to ensuring appropriate, 
clear customer consent is obtained and maintained. If this term is breached it may 
result in suspension of an ASPSPs/TPPS registration and ultimately result in termination 
from the API Centre. This means that the terminated ASPSP/TPP right to use the API 
Standards or a Standardised API with another ASPSP/TPP is revoked and they must 
immediately stop using the API Standards with other ASPSPs/TPPs. They must also 
remove any express or implied connection to the API Centre and the API Standards.” 
“The Fintech Law of Mexico grants powers to the Supervisory Commissions to 
suspend partially/totally and temporary/definitively the exchange of data when the 
parties do not comply with the standards and the rules for the exchange” 
“For a TPP/PSSP, licensed by the Central Bank of Nigeria, their licenses can be revoked 
or they can be fined. The actual fines are not codified, however, according to the 
National Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA) data privacy rule, 
companies can be fined up to N10m of annual revenue or 2%; whichever is greater.” 
Adédèjì Olówè, Trustee,
Open Banking Nigeria
Steve Wiggins, Chief Executive,
PaymentsNZ
Mariana Velázquez Suárez, Expert,  
Mexico Open Banking

ConclusionAppendix
Consent is a complicated, but necessary aspect of data sharing and governance, especially within the banking sector 
where data can provide significant insights into the activities of people and organisations and where misuse of that data 
can lead to significant harm. Consent is inextricably tied to the legal, political, economic and social idiosyncrasies of a 
country, region, or market. This means that certain aspects can be hard to compare, and that regional knowledge is 
very important for operating across markets.
However there are some key similarities regarding how consent is given and revoked, as countries place importance on 
it be explicit, well-informed, straightforward, and for a clear purpose. Countries also believe in limits and punishments, 
though these can be varied and have a strong link to the privacy laws of a country.
Some countries have similar consent environments to each other. Australia and New Zealand have built their Open 
Banking initiatives off of the UK model and the three countries have similar consent environments.
The “redirect model” of obtaining consent is seen worldwide as well, from Europe to Australia and New Zealand, to 
Nigeria’s Open Banking environment as well. 
The ability and ease to revoke consent is seen as important as to give it. Most consent environments have implemented 
or are implementing the ability to revoke consent as easily as the ability to give it.
Most countries have not decided on the exact length of time that consent should be granted for. Those that do fall 
under the PSD2 mandated length of 90 days, or in the case of Australia and New Zealand have opted for 12 months.
As Open Banking is becoming an increasingly multinational movement, and inspiring similar initiatives in other sectors, 
then we recommend that banks and regulators perform and openly publish further research to make it easier for 
people and organisations to understand the rules for consent that apply to them.
This research could deepen our work, for example by exploring whether there are differences in the definitions of 
terms such as ‘explicit’ and ‘informed’, but it could also cover further research questions. 
Some suggestions that we identified in our work were:
Continuing to research Open Banking internationally and engaging with the global community to share best practises 
will help Open Banking initiatives create impact and lead to a more open and trustworthy data ecosystem.
Who is allowed to consent on behalf of a business?
How does consent vary across sectors and different categories of data?
Can people delegate consent to a third party and, if so, under what conditions?
How do customers understand the rules of consent? 
How do banks and third party providers understood the rules of consent?
Are the penalties for breaking the rules enforced?
Contributers
NameRoleOrganisation
David BeardmoreCommercial DirectorODI
Josh D’AddarioConsultantODI
Miranda MarcusR&D Programme ManagerODI
Peter WellsDirector of Public PolicyODI
Sonia DuarteUser ResearcherODI
Andy WhiteCEOAustralia Payments Network and on the 
Advisory Committee of Data 61
Adédèjì OlówèTrusteeOpen Banking Nigeria
Gerry GaetzCEOPayments Canada
Emma SteeleyCEOAccountScore
Jumpei MiwaDirector, Fintech and Innovation OfficeFinancial Services Agency
Mariana Velázquez 
Suárez
ExpertMexico Open Banking
Miles CheethamHead of PropositionsOpen Banking Ltd.
Rubén BajoCOOAfterbanks - Morpheus Aiolos S.L.
Steve WigginsChief ExecutivePayments NZ
1918

Interview questions
Supporting documents
•  Are any important actors missing? If yes, please tell us which ones
•  How do consumers give consent?
•  Are there any rules that restrict who consumers can consent to sharing banking data with?
•  Are there any rules that limit what the data can be used for?
•  How long a time period can people consent to sharing data for?
•  Can people revoke consent? If so, how?
•  What are the consequences of breaking these rules?
•  Does your country have specific Open Banking regulations? If not can you describe, and link to, any information on  
  the regulations (whether current or pending) that informed your previous answers?
• How far Open Banking has come: our five takeaways
• Open Banking: Preparing for Lift Off
• How Nationwide is using Open Banking to help the ‘financially squeezed’
• Open Banking in the UK and France
• Open Banking: setting a standard and enabling innovation
20

Support and questions
For further information or to discover 
how Open Banking can work for you, 
please email:
eumarketing@equifax.com
Equifax Limited is registered in England with Registered No. 2425920
Registered Office: 1 Angel Court, London, EC2R 7HJ 
Equifax Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority